Title: 2605.28481v1.pdf

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.28481v1

Published Time: Thu, 28 May 2026 01:18:36 GMT

Number of Pages: 30

Markdown Content:
Co-creation of AI technology, empowering curators 

# of cultural heritage information and guarding 

# research commons 

## Andrea Scharnhorst, Han Yang, Jetze Touber, Kim Ferguson, Philipp Mayr, 

## and Vyacheslav Tykhonov 

# 1. Introduction – the use of large language models in engineering 

# explorations around long-term archiving 

The substance of this paper is the description of the use of Retrieval-Augmented Gener -

ation (RAG) – a new methodology for information retrieval – for specific digital collec -

tions of cultural assets. The collections are provided by institutions operating in the cul -

tural sector. The topical areas are the humanities and social sciences. More concretely, 

most of the work presented here was enabled by a European-funded research project 

MuseIT 1 which is clearly situated in the realm of fostering new technologies for Cultural 

Heritage. 

The International workshop on “Large Language Models for the History, Philosophy, 

and Sociology of Science” held in Berlin in April 2025 2 enabled us to present engineer -

ing explorations around implementing machine-aided knowledge organisation and lo -

cal generative AI (chatbots). The presentation of our basically practice-born approaches 

in such a scientific context had various functions. We were able to see if our engineer -

ing explorations stand the test of a scientific debate and how they compared to other 

experimentations around LLMs. But, the setting of the workshop in the field of History, 

Philosophy, and Sociology of Science came naturally with a reflexive layer on the nature 

and role of LLMs for academia and beyond. 

We adhere to this interaction by presenting a sequence of our experimentations. 

This sequence is narrated as a specific journey of engineering all executed around a spe -

1 Multisensory, User-centred, Shared cultural Experiences through Interactive Technologies � (Mu -

seIT) Project funded 2022 – 2025. Available at  https://www.muse-it.eu/  (accessed November 5, 

2025). 

2 Programme of the workshop. Available at  https://www.tu.berlin/hps-mod-sci/llms-for-hpss/work 

shop-llms-for-hpss  (accessed November 5, 2025). 384 Part 5: Retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) 

cific data-sharing and archiving platform Dataverse 3 (Crosas, 2017). Implementing a lo -

cal chatbot for collections – a method also known as RAG in Information Retrieval, is the current culmination of this journey. To connect the engineering explorations with the scientific discourse and also with other contributions to these proceedings, we present at the end of this introduction a literature study on the RAG discourse. 

In the next section of this paper, we point out how these RAG applications are actu -

ally the result of a longer process of enabling agile infrastructures for data sharing and archiving which feed on forefront technological developments, while at the same time adhering to principles of Open Science and empowering institutions in the public sector (Tykhonov, 2020). We return to this more general aspect in the conclusion section of this paper. 

The engineering journey we describe in the core of the paper starts from ‘archives for everyone’ and ends with ‘local chatbots for specific collections’. It has been executed with the help of various projects which all came with specific focal points. But, to some extent in one of the last projects in that row, MuseIT, all those earlier experiences came together, and so we use the ‘MuseIT – case’ to illustrate this engineering quest. The ques -

tion underlying our own explorative journey has been always: How to improve the inter -

action with collections of documents – preferably archived in a way which respects the principles of FAIRness (Wilkinson et al., 2016) and Open Science (Bartling and Friesike, 2014). We use the MuseIT lens to unfold the various techniques which can be applied to increase accessibility of collections, from machine supported Knowledge Organization Systems (KOS) construction, connecting KOS services, to building search interfaces us -

ing a combination of LLM and KOS techniques. One could say this part of the paper is a ‘practice description’. We use the concluding section of the paper to unfold a couple of more generic aspects in the description of our use-case. 

With this concluding section we respond to the invitation which the editors of these proceedings formulated as such “Rather than offering a conventional edited volume or adelayed ‘state of the art’ account—likely outdated upon publication—it gathers timely, authentic contributions from a field in motion. This framing invites openness, exper -

imentation, and personal interpretation, encouraging authors to draw on their own styles, interests, and positions within or adjacent to the HPSS community. It reflects the spirit of the workshop—lively, collaborative, and intellectually diverse—and carries that spirit into the published volume.” 4 Taking this invitation to heart and still inspired by the workshop discussions themselves, we felt encouraged to add a more reflexive layer to our ‘practice report’. We are not sure which of the possible writing-forms the editors listed as alternatives, “traditional essays, dialogues, creative thought experiments, research vignettes, theoretical provocations, agenda-setting pieces, tutorial-style texts, or auto-

theoretical pieces,” best describes our reflections. In any case, we would like to share them in the context of these proceedings because they touch upon dimensions which might also have a relevance for other more methodological or theoretical contributions in these proceedings.                                           

> 3More information on Dataverse as aproject, its use and best practices, the community around it, and the software. Available at https://dataverse.org/ (accessed November 5, 2025).
> 4Personal communication, invitation to submit papers. Scharnhorst, Yang, Touber, Ferguson, Mayr, and Tykhonov: Co-creation of AI technology 385

All of these additional dimensions, epistemologically spoken, concern science-of-sci -

ence aspects. They are questions about the nature of knowledge production as executed 

in our experiments, the role of the stakeholders involved, and the quest for a terminology 

to discuss innovation in research infrastructures. They partly touch on old fundamental 

questions of the roles of intelligent machines for knowledge production (Kurzweil, 1990) 

and the human-machine interaction patterns which we observe, initiate and might want 

to shape also. But, they also concern the social and economic layer of science and knowl -

edge dynamics, the interplay between public and private actors with different (economic) 

needs and requirements. 

So, in the conclusion of this paper we take a turn towards more general questions 

such as: 

• What is the position of archives and other institutions of the GLAM sector which are 

stakeholders for public knowledge commons in the current race for new AI technolo -

gies? 

• How can institutions in the public sector be part of the early adopter cohort and this 

way also co-design technology? 

• To which extent do new AI driven Information Retrieval approaches as described in 

our use case empower both content producers and content consumers? 

To address these questions in the last part of the paper, we turn to the model of the Global 

Open Research Commons (Treloar and Woodfoord, 2024) as a means to reflect on how 

institutions in the public sector can stay true to principles of Open Science and Research 

Commons while embracing the distributed nature of the knowledge production process 

which includes all societal sectors: government, industry, academia and the wider public. 

As said above at the core of the paper, we look into engineering explorations to en -

hance the accessibility of digital collections presented on the web. In those explorations 

Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) plays a central role. That’s why we end this in -

troduction with summarizing the RAG approach, how it relates to LLMs and how it in -

fluences the way we think about Information Retrieval. 

# 1.1 RAG as a new method in Information retrieval 

Large Language Models (LLMs) (Brown et al., 2020) encode knowledge implicitly within 

their parameters during the pre-training phase, typically by optimizing for next-token 

prediction. This implicit encoding presents challenges for explicit knowledge inspection, 

modification, or deletion, thereby limiting the model’s adaptability to updated or cor -

rected information (Nie et al., 2025; Guirguis et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2025a; Wang et 

al., 2025b). Consequently, LLMs are prone to generating outdated, inaccurate, or unveri -

fiable outputs. In certain cases, they may fabricate content—referred to as hallucinations 

— in order to preserve internal coherence or plausibility. 

To mitigate these limitations, the Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) frame -

work has been introduced as an effective approach for addressing knowledge-intensive 

tasks (Lewis et al., 2020). RAG decouples the knowledge component from the generative 

model by incorporating two primary modules: a retriever and a generator (Lewis et 386 Part 5: Retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) 

al., 2020). Upon receiving a query, the retriever searches an external knowledge base for semantically relevant documents, typically through embedding-based similarity measures such as cosine similarity. These retrieved documents, together with the query, are then used to construct an augmented prompt that is passed to the generator—often a pre-trained LLM—which synthesizes a natural language response. 

This paradigm offers multiple advantages that address core limitations of pre-

trained language models (Gao et al., 2023). First, the knowledge base is decoupled from the model parameters, allowing it to be updated independently, thereby enabling timely and flexible incorporation of new information without the need for costly model retraining. Second, by grounding the generation process in retrieved documents, RAG significantly reduces hallucinations, as the model can rely on externally verified sources rather than internal approximations. Third, the system becomes inherently more inter -

pretable and transparent, since each generated answer can be traced back to specific supporting documents in the retrieval set. Finally, RAG is considerably more cost-effec -

tive than retraining large-scale LLMs, which not only require substantial computational resources but also risk performance degradation due to catastrophic forgetting (Wei et al., 2022a). To summarize, RAG builds on existing semantic reference bases, similar to how controlled vocabularies or classifications are more specifically defined than natural language expressions. 

Having said this, RAG is not per se easy to be interpreted or transparent to the user. It just provides other ways to check a claim or assertion. Compared to traditional informa -

tion retrieval systems, RAG demonstrates a superior flexibility by enabling users to issue natural language, contextual, or follow-up questions without predefined templates. The semantic matching capabilities of modern retrievers, combined with the generative ca -

pacity of LLMs, facilitate a more robust and user-friendly interaction paradigm for in -

formation access and reasoning over unstructured data sources (Tykhonov et al., 2025). 

In conclusion, the RAG paradigm provides a more robust framework for building controllable, reliable, and eventually more trustworthy AI systems that can adapt to evolving knowledge with greater interpretability and efficiency. But, different episte -

mologies continue to exist as expressions of representations of knowledge. To judge the results of the query will remain context dependent and related to the information needs of the user. This cannot be solved by machines but requires the human in the loop, for which those machines are supposed to act as tools for this human in her/his epistemic journey not as avatars taking the place of the human. 

While RAG has shown significant promise in addressing knowledge-intensive tasks (Arslan, Munawar and Cruz, 2024; Liu, 2024), it remains an evolving paradigm and is subject to several limitations. One major challenge lies in retrieval quality: the retrieved documents may be irrelevant, redundant, or unhelpful to the current query, and in some cases, a retrieval may not even be necessary (Jiang et al., 2023; Asai et al., 2024; Yan et al., 2024). Additionally, the language model itself may be constrained by limited sum -

marization capabilities or may default to relying on its own internal knowledge (Wu et al., 2025). Furthermore, RAG systems often underperform on complex queries, such as multi-hop questions or those requiring a holistic understanding of the entire document set (Wang et al., 2024; Edge et al., 2024). Scharnhorst, Yang, Touber, Ferguson, Mayr, and Tykhonov: Co-creation of AI technology 387 

To address the retrieval quality issue, CorrectiveRAG (Yan et al., 2024) introduces an 

auxiliary, lightweight language model to estimate the relevance between each retrieved 

document and the query, assigning a scalar relevance score. Documents with lower rel -

evance scores are subsequently filtered out, thereby improving the overall quality and 

utility of the input to the generative model. 

Additionally, some other research explored modifications to the RAG workflow, aim -

ing to enhance retrieval quality. ActiveRAG (Jiang et al., 2023) proposes a dynamic and 

iterative retrieval mechanism, where the LLM actively determines when and what to re -

trieve based on its internal uncertainty. Concretely, the LLM begins with an initial re -

trieval and proceeds to generate a provisional sentence. If it detects low confidence in 

predicting the subsequent token, it triggers an additional retrieval operation specific to 

that uncertain segment. This sentence-by-sentence decision process continues until a

complete answer is formed, thus avoiding redundant or irrelevant retrieval steps. 

As a further advancement, SelfRAG (Asai et al., 2024) introduces a more introspec -

tive control loop to optimize retrieval decision-making. Instead of retrieving documents 

by default, the LLM first attempts to generate a response without external knowledge, 

and then reflects on whether retrieval is needed. If retrieval is deemed necessary, it is 

performed, followed by a reassessment of the relevance and utility of the retrieved docu -

ments. This “answer–think–retrieve–think–answer” workflow ensures that retrieval oc -

curs only when beneficial, thereby reducing unnecessary queries and filtering out un -

helpful content. 

While RAG systems rely on large language models (LLMs) to generate responses 

based on retrieved documents, they remain vulnerable to hallucinations and misleading 

evidence, particularly when irrelevant or low-quality documents are included in the con -

text. To address this issue, RankCOT (Wu et al., 2025) introduces a novel approach that 

integrates Chain-of-Thought (CoT) (Wei et al., 2022b) reasoning with document rerank -

ing and summarization to improve generation quality. CoT is a prompting strategy that 

encourages LLMs to generate intermediate reasoning steps, thereby enhancing trans -

parency and answer reliability. In RankCOT, this strategy is further enhanced by fine-

tuning the model using Direct Preference Optimization (DPO) (Rafailov et al., 2023), 

allowing it to better assess and prioritize documents based on their relevance to the 

query. This method effectively filters out irrelevant content and reduces the likelihood of 

hallucinated or inconsistent responses during the generation process. 

Although the vanilla RAG framework performs well on many knowledge-intensive 

tasks, it faces limitations when addressing complex queries requiring global under -

standing, such as multi-hop reasoning, multi-turn interactions, or questions that 

require aggregating knowledge dispersed across multiple documents (see also Meding 

and Daugs, 2026b). These challenges arise in part due to the limited context window 

of LLMs and the constraints of implicit working memory, which is driven by the self-

attention mechanism. As the number of retrieved documents increases, the model may 

become overwhelmed, leading to degraded performance and fragmented reasoning 

(Hołyst et al., 2024; Shi et al., 2023; Upadhayay, Behzadan and Karbasi, 2024). 

To address this issue, DeepNote (Wang et al., 2024) introduces an external memory 

module in the form of a structured “notebook”. The LLM initializes this notebook with 

intermediate facts based on the query. It then performs iterative retrievals to refine and 388 Part 5: Retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) 

expand these notes by incorporating information from relevant documents. After each round of retrieval, the LLM reevaluates the query, updates the notebook, and rethinks anew query if the facts in the notebook remain ambiguous, until the accumulated facts are sufficient to construct a coherent and accurate answer. This process effectively offloads intermediate reasoning steps to a persistent external memory, mitigating the limitations of the context window. 

Similarly, GraphRAG (Edge et al., 2024) targets tasks that require understanding inter-document relationships, such as identifying connections between entities across documents. This method extracts entities and relations from the corpus to construct a knowledge graph, which is then used to identify entity communities through clus -

tering. Instead of retrieving raw documents, GraphRAG retrieves and summarizes these communities to serve as input to the LLM. This graph-based abstraction supports more structured, comprehensive reasoning, particularly in scenarios where an answer depends on synthesizing information from a large and semantically interconnected corpus. 

In conclusion, the Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) framework represents apromising direction for enhancing the reliability, transparency, and adaptability of AI systems in knowledge-intensive applications. A growing research has focused on extend -

ing and refining the RAG methodology to support complex reasoning and mitigate hallu -

cinations. As a result, RAG is rapidly evolving into a more versatile and robust paradigm, increasingly capable of tackling challenging tasks and delivering answers with higher factual accuracy and contextual relevance. 

Parallel with the further scientific development of RAG based methods, its descrip -

tion and evaluation, elements of LLMs together with machine readable KOS systems, continuously find their way into engineering explorations. Whatever becomes available in forms of libraries, but also general ideas on what workflows could look like gets roped in daily innovative practices around exciting services or tools. Hereby, as we will see later, often the development of new standards play a role. Those engineering explorations are often agnostic towards a concrete service, but very much informed by the needs of con -

crete services. 

In our paper we describe a workflow which falls methodologically under the RAG approach, but has been developed in a practice context and more specifically related to a specific archival platform Dataverse . Our specific take concerning the discourse sum -

marised above is to describe methods from the perspective of them being implemented, applied, used in concrete research infrastructure settings. We return to more general as -

pects of new AI based technologies (including RAG) in the conclusions. Scharnhorst, Yang, Touber, Ferguson, Mayr, and Tykhonov: Co-creation of AI technology 389 

# 2. An engineering journey – adoption and exploration of new AI technology 

# (including RAG) in areas of cultural heritage 

# 2.1 The case of the MuseIT project and its specific needs 

The MuseIT project enabled a substantial portion of the work presented in this paper. 

MuseIT stands for “Multisensory, User-centred, Shared cultural Experiences through In -

teractive Technologies” and is funded by the Horizon Europe programme under the call 

‘Culture, creativity and inclusive society’. Its mission as stated on the website is: ‘Aiming 

for greater equality, democratization, and social inclusion, MuseIT offers technologies 

designed to enhance and expand access to cultural assets for individuals with disabili -

ties while also contributing to the preservation and protection of cultural heritage in an 

inclusive manner.’ 5 The project type is a Research and Innovation Action (RIA). This is rele -

vant in order to understand the composition of the consortium and the kind of knowl -

edge production executed in the project. RIA’s are expected to establish new knowledge 

and/or to explore new or improved technology and/or services and most broadly any so -

lutions. The project is led by the i-School of the University Borås, Sweden, but the con -

sortium brings together research groups from the universities and large-scale research 

consortiums with Small and Medium Enterprises and organisations in the cultural sector 

(Ntonga, Pokorny and Olson, 2023). One of the higher education institutions in the con -

sortium is DANS, Data Archiving and Network Services, an institute of the Royal Nether -

lands Academy of Arts and Sciences (KNAW), where some of the authors of this paper 

work. DANS’ role for the consortium was primarily to contribute its own expertise in 

fields of research data management and long-term archiving. DANS itself, while part of 

the institute portfolio of the KNAW, is not a research institute but a service provider for 

all questions of digital research data. It also hosts a variety of data archiving services for 

researchers and research institutions (Morselli, Touber, and Scharnhorst, 2025). Being 

part of the research infrastructure area, DANS participates in research projects such as 

MuseIT with the aim to stay in touch with new technological developments, being able 

to do explorations as RIA types of projects offer, all with the ultimate aim to innovate its 

own services. 

MuseIT combined fundamental research with the quest for infrastructural solutions. 

To enhance the accessibility of cultural assets, finding new ways to represent those assets 

was very important. Think here of involving various senses in the interaction with cul -

tural assets. Examples are the development of haptic devices, the description of images 

by text and sound, or the translation between music and other forms of creativity — all 

examples for multi-sensory representations. Addressing multimodality was an impor -

tant topic for the project. MuseIT addressed this topic by exploring new technological 

ways to support co-creation of cultural assets. This way, MuseIT combined both inclusion 

and better (web) accessibility concerning the consumption as well as in the production of 

cultural assets. One of the cornerstones of the project was the further development of a

platform (JackTrip TM ) which enabled artists to make music together on the internet time-

lag free (Cáceres and Chafe, 2010). Last but not least, MuseIT also aspired to advance the  

> 5https://www.muse-it.eu/

390 Part 5: Retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) 

ways multimodality in the context of accessibility and inclusion could be made part of documentation and long-term archiving. More concretely, the project plan formulated, “One of the key outcomes of MuseIT is the content repository capable of indexing, stor -

ing and retrieving multisensory, multi-layered representation of cultural assets…”. 6 This is where the experiences at DANS both with consulting on standard archival techniques as well as with pushing the boundaries of such archival services became relevant. 

For both research as well as documentation in the MuseIT project 7, the ways to order knowledge played an important role. A so-called Knowledge Organisation System (KOS) 8

encompasses taxonomies, ontologies, classifications, thesauri, etc.. For collections, the metadata schemes used in indexing the collections are one example for a KOS. But, in each scientific field KOS are also used to annotate the scientific content, representing the canon of relevant and connected concepts that define the heart of a field. In the discourse around Knowledge Organisation Systems, it is not always made explicit that KOS have different epistemic functions. In MuseIT, a lot of ontology engineering took place to de -

velop new ways to conceptualise multimodality. While existing KOS were reviewed and taken into account during this scientific journey, in this particular part of the project, the emphasis was on the development of new ways of thinking and categorizing. KOS in such a heuristic function are by default not primarily interoperable (Scharnhorst and Smiraglia, 2021). If one thinks about the use of KOS for indexing content, interoperability is part of making content or data FAIR (Wilkinson et al., 2016). FAIRness of data (or more broadly, any kind of content) is a precondition to scale up information processing opera -

tions across various collections of data. Interoperable here means machine-readable in away that semantic meaning is also transported. But, even in this area of documentation if it comes to the use of KOS, there is always a tension between KOS tailored specifically to the needs of a collection, their curators and their designated user communities, and the request to being ‘linkable’ across various bodies of knowledge as represented in various collections. This is not a trivial task (Gueret et al., 2013) as much of the work on KOS reg -

istry, catalogues and cross-walk workflows can testify (see e.g., Nyberg Åkerström et al., 2024). Inside of MuseIT we find both: ontology engineering as a means to formalise and extend our way to think about inclusion, accessibility and multisensory representations (see e.g., Domingues et al. 2024). But, we also find implementation of KOS in indexing collections, combining existing and new aspects in KOS when it comes to multimodality (Tykhonov and Olsen, 2023). 

In MuseIT, one of the most recent experiments concerned an implementation of aRAG method in the form of a “Chatting with collections” local chatbot. In this workflow, as typical for RAG (see above) LLMs (sometimes called unstructured data) are combined with KOS (sometimes called structured data). But before one can construct such a chat -

bot a couple of steps were needed: First to have a repository or archive, second to apply                                                                       

> 6Project proposal, personal communication Scharnhorst.
> 7And yes these are two different practices with different norms, values and different skill sets needed in the execution – see (Daga et al. 2023) for more details.
> 8KOS is atechnical term well defined in the field of Knowledge Organisation, which is situated at the cross-roads of philosophy of science, information and computer science. For the International So -
> ciety of Knowledge Organisation see https://www.isko.org/ko.html (Accessed November 6, 2025).

Scharnhorst, Yang, Touber, Ferguson, Mayr, and Tykhonov: Co-creation of AI technology 391 

suitable KOS for its content, and only then as a third step an experiment to locally imple -

ment a chatbot could happen. The next section describes those steps around the MuseIT 

repository approach (Kontogiannis et al., 2025). We start with the choice of an archival 

platform to then turn to a specific instance of such an archive on which various exper -

imentations were executed. Describing this engineering journey, we also highlight as -

pects of the nature of this practice, the preconditions created by project financing, the 

skills needed and the discussions which have taken place. 

# 2.2 An engineering journey – from ‘everyone can archive’ 

# to a locally implemented RAG 

# 2.2.1 Everyone can archive 

MuseIT very boldly stated in its project workplan that there is a need for a cultural 

heritage archive for storing multisensory representation. Talking about a repository 

or archive immediately includes questions of what collection(s) of digital assets should 

be archived, how to order them and make them accessible for users, and how to ad -

here to requirements for digital (long-term) preservation. Institutions rely on various 

approaches. Sometimes they have the capacity to build tailored software solutions 

in-house, sometimes they rely on commercial services. But, most often ICT capacities to 

build tailored solutions are not there. This holds for institutions in the higher education 

sector as well as for institutions in the GLAM sector. A middle way is to rope in the 

expertise in archiving of institutions operating in the public sector, and to use software 

which is developed and maintained by open software communities. This is the approach, 

partners in MuseIT have chosen, and the project provided the means to support con -

sortium members in taking the first hurdle in setting up a digital archive. DANS, as a

member of the MuseIT consortium provided this support and eventually the choice for 

a digital archiving platform went to The Dataverse Project (Crosas, 2017). Dataverse is an 

open source web application to share, publish and explore research data. Developed first 

at the Institute for Quantitative Social Science at Harvard University, there are currently 

about 137 installations of Dataverse worldwide with many collections (Dataverses) and 

datasets. DANS has built its own archival data services for the Dutch higher education 

institutions (DataverseNL 9) and for Dutch researchers directly (DANS Data Stations) 

implementing this software. DANS engineers have also actively contributed in the 

further development of the software, and – drawing on the funds provided by other 

European projects – developed ways to make setting up a Dataverse instance easier. This 

has been described as ‘Archive in a Box’ (as described in Wittenberg et al., 2022). This 

significantly lowers the threshold in setting up a repository – so Anyone can archive . This 

is very similar to the ways one could observe how information visualisation has been 

democratized over the last decade. For the latter see for example the Places and Spaces 10 

long-term project of Katy Börner as documented in the series of atlases of information                               

> 9More information available at dataverse.nl (Accessed November 8, 2025).
> 10 More information about the Places and Spaces: Mapping Science enterprise can be found at the web -
> site: https://scimaps.org/home (Accessed November 10, 2025).

392 Part 5: Retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) 

visualisation (Börner, 2010, 2015, 2021; Börner, Record, Theriault 2025) of which the second carries the title Anyone can map (Börner, 2025). 

The tasks MuseIT wanted to be supported by one or multiple repositories were mul -

tifold. Among them was: 

1.  to have a shared repository during the project lifetime to be used across all work pack -

ages; 

2.  to choose a technical solution which is flexible towards the needs of various collec -

tions which emerged in the various use cases of the project (examples are cultural heritage material, but also scientific articles, and ways to directly save data streams from sensors); 

3.  to have a place to register various ontologies and KOS relevant for aspects of accessi -

bility and multimodal representations; 

4.  to have a repository with metadata scheme(s) which can be tailored towards the va -

riety of content mentioned above and 

5.  a variety of means to interact with this content. 

Needless to say that the repository should operate on the web, and adhere to FAIR prin -

ciples concerning machine actions. At the end MuseIT implemented two instances of Dataverse: a general MuseIT Dataverse instance, to manage all project related research datasets. To this general instance partners contributed with datasets, but also by design -

ing the metadata schemes and developing workflows around the instance (Kontogiannis et al., 2025). A second more specifically tailored instance was developed by ShareMu -

sic 11  – one of the cultural heritage partners in MuseIT together with DANS. Around this instance several experimentations involving AI based methods were executed – as we will sketch in the next two subsections. 

To summarise, there were several advantages to choosing Dataverse as a software so -

lution. The software project itself operates in the public sphere and adheres to Open Sci -

ence principles. The repository solution, as we will see, is flexible enough to be both inter -

operable concerning core standard information on datasets, as well as to allow designing a collection specific, flexible metadata scheme. The existence of a Dataverse global engi -

neering community secures the release of an updated, tested master version while at the same time creating a forum for experimenting with the newest technological possibili -

ties. 

Concerning AI methods, the Dataverse community as Boyd presented recently cur -

rently has more than 10 workflows developed (Fig. 1), which include AI components (Boyd, 2025). 12  Some of them are production ready, some are still in development. In some of them (e.g., Croissant (Akthar et al. 2024), and the Model Context Protocol) DANS                           

> 11 ShareMusic &Performing Arts is aSwedish national knowledge centre for artistic development and inclusion. For more information see their website: https://www.sharemusic.se/en/home (Ac -
> cessed November 10, 2025).
> 12 https://dataverse.org/presentations/ai-and-dataverse-project-using-ai-benefit-research-data-co mmunity-members

Scharnhorst, Yang, Touber, Ferguson, Mayr, and Tykhonov: Co-creation of AI technology 393 

has been involved. As we will see, some of those ideas have also found their way into the MuseIT project. 

Figure 1:  Overview of AI related workflows in Dataverse – Slide reproduced from Celyn Boyd’s presentation September 2025 (Boyd, 2025). 

# 2.2.2 Customize your archive – build your own knowledge base 

In the previous section we already referred to the objectives of MuseIT. These include to increase the accessibility of cultural assets by the development of multisensory represen -

tations, enabling engagement by the public regardless of functional or sensory impair -

ments, as well as to develop methodologies for preservation and safeguarding cultural heritage assets. For the creation of representations and the final design of repositories Knowledge Organisation Systems (KOS) are key. KOS are used in defining the metadata describing the cultural assets, but also the ways in which one can interact with those as -

sets. 

One of the consortium members of MuseIT, the organisation ShareMusic, came with a specific need concerning a repository. This Swedish cultural organisation describes it -

self as “a national knowledge centre for artistic development and inclusion” and states on its website: “We work for everyone’s right to experience, participate in and practise artistic and cultural activities”. 13  ShareMusic organises events of performing arts next to workshops and seminars. All those activities are dedicated to shaping a “new cultural landscape with new expressions and narratives by disabled practitioners”; to “increase[d] knowledge of inclusive practices across the cultural ecosystem” and ultimately to con -

tributing to a richer and more equal cultural life in Sweden — and the world — that re -

flects the diversity and richness of society”. 14  These are just some expressions of the aspi -

rations of this organisation. What makes ShareMusic also special is that to realise these goals the organisation has a long-standing tradition to work together with scientific and other knowledge producing institutions to test new methods to enable both production and consumption of cultural assets, here music, despite any sensoric impediments of         

> 13 Quotation from the website: https://www.sharemusic.se/en/home
> 14 See Footnote 13.

394 Part 5: Retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) 

involved actors. In consequence, their ‘collection’ of material is wide and varies from sci -

entific articles (as in a classical digital library), to performance recordings and other live data streams which might deserve a long-term preservation, and to newsletters and blog posts about performances. The latter represent ephemera which are often not preserved because of their temporary character. Those traces – if by chance preserved – enable aricher look into the past. To summarize, ShareMusic is an organisation with one foot in the cultural sector and one foot in the innovative processes as executed in academia and other Mode2 knowledge organisations with a collection of material at hand which is varied by nature. 

The aspirations of ShareMusic when designing an archive for this material went far beyond having just a place to index and preserve this material. As detailed in (Johansson et al., 2025), ShareMusic wanted to build a Knowledge Base for Art and Inclusion, which conceptualisation embraced new KOS to describe features relevant for accessibility and inclusion. This knowledge base should inform the curation of the material and make the work of those curators easier, but should also enable various different interfaces to in -

teract with the collection on-line. 

Again the choice to rely on Dataverse as a technological solution to archive and index these digital traces (data) proved right. Part of the agility of this specific infrastructural approach to archiving lies in the possibility to extend the metadata scheme which usu -

ally comes as a standard block for any Dataverse instance. Not only can the metadata schema be extended, it is also possible to automatically connect it to other controlled vo -

cabularies relevant for the specific content of the ShareMusic collection and the specific interactions with this content which have been envisioned. Such connections had been tested for Dataverse in other projects, so workflows were available and could be adapted to this specific case (Myers and Tykhonov, 2023). 

At the end, for the ShareMusic instance, Dataverse acted as an ‘invisible archive’, as atechnological backbone complemented by interfaces to support curation and access. As visible in the snapshots of the website 15  below (see Fig. 2) the modalities in which ma -

terial was digitally documented and ways of interaction were also indicated. During the explorations, further AI supported workflows, e.g. to describe a picture with words, or to sonify an image were tested. The final implemented solutions are rather standard, and the overall accessibility of the web-based interface is not yet fully developed. But, the specific requirements of the organisation and the current implementation of an archive with a set of new features proved an interesting learning experience for both engineers and those working in such a cultural institution. 

As Fig. 2 shows for the ShareMusic Dataverse instance an additional metadata block has been designed containing fields as modalities, ways of interaction, and art form. This block also contains further ShareMusic specific elements of knowledge ordering as Topic .Using the Topic feature, and its subcategories Topic Name and Topic Type , ShareMusic’s data curators are able to create sub-collections around events and/or projects. Those or -

derings are visible on the Knowledge Base interface, which is the envisioned main entrance to engage with the content (see Fig.3). In this specific interface, other metadata features          

> 15 For the Dataverse instance used as backbone see: https://database.sharemusic.se/dataverse/root ?q=&types=dataverses%3Adatasets&sort=dateSort&order=desc&page=1

Scharnhorst, Yang, Touber, Ferguson, Mayr, and Tykhonov: Co-creation of AI technology 395 

as for instance modalities are emphasised as ways of interaction. It is also this interface, 

in which a local AI chat bot is hidden behind the toggle Ask Our Assistant , the features of 

which we will describe in the next section. 

Fig. 2:  Snapshot of the Dataverse instance at ShareMusic, highlighting the added 

metadata fields. 

Fig. 3:  The Knowledge Base designed for the ShareMusic collection 16                 

> 16 Snapshot of the website https://knowledgebase.sharemusic.se/ –the interface to interact with col -
> lections (Accessed October 18, 2025).

396 Part 5: Retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) 

# 2.3 Chatting with a collection – LLMs and RAG tested in practice 

As described in the previous sections, the engineering journey which led to testing LLMs 

and more specifically RAG approaches for a concrete archive started with (1) enabling to 

install archival (open source) software for a wider group of institutions and continued 

with (2) various explorations to integrate new technological solutions into this archival 

platform solution. An inbetween step was to enhance the metadata description of the 

archived content. Here, possibilities to integrate links to other existing machine readable 

KOS as part of the indexing was one important step (De Vries et al., 2022, Zamborlini et 

al. 2024). The currently existing universe of linked KOS, which is part of the semantic web 

technology (see e.g., Merono Penuela, 2016), fosters reuse of KOS and standardisation, 

but it also adds meaning to content on an unprecedented scale. This – as shown in the 

short literature review above (see the section Introduction) – is the precondition for any 

RAG approach. For an institution as DANS which provides archival services, the task to 

make collections better accessible, and to foster re-use is key. One way to enhance the 

potential of re-use is to convey meaning to the deposited datasets. How to do this is a very 

intriguing problem. Semantic meaning is traditionally codified in the metadata scheme 

models and the values of their parameters. But, it does not translate automatically and 

easily to a wide range of users. As we pointed out in the introduction, KOS are always 

specific – meaning here that they represent a distinct specific framework to represent 

material which evokes specific types of reflections. For the DANS Datastations, which 

are for good reasons discipline oriented, adding discipline specific information to the 

metadata is a long standing issue. 

When the new generation of Generative AI emerged, the question immediately arose 

which of those features could be used also for a better Information Retrieval around Digi -

tal Archives. In our own internal discussions which were also interdisciplinary by nature, 

we were looking for metaphors to differentiate between a KOS and a LLM approach. In 

the first approach meaning to the content would be given through connecting towards 

various KOS (also sometimes called structured data). In the second approach meaning 

would be extracted from the content itself directly using emerging patterns and in the 

case of LLMs this would be textual ones. One metaphor we used in our internal commu -

nication was to see LLMs as experts which one can ask in natural language. This would 

be different from relying on KOS which we saw similar to asking a librarian, who while 

not familiar in depth with all content, is apt in the meaningful ordering systems for types 

of content. At the end, the workflow for the implementation of a local chatbot together 

with the web interface was named Ghostwriter . Fig. 4 (as presented by Mayr et al. 2025) 

gives an overview how the Ghostwriter approach relates to other Information Retrieval 

approaches. Scharnhorst, Yang, Touber, Ferguson, Mayr, and Tykhonov: Co-creation of AI technology 397 

Fig 4:  Position of the Ghostwriter approach in relation to other information retrieval methods. 

Slide from the presentation (Mayr et al., 2025) 

The precondition for the Ghostwriter workflow to function is to express all available 

information (from the collection in question, but also all contextual enrichment one can 

connect the collection to on the web) in a machine-readable form ready to be processed. 

This other workflow preceding Ghostwriter was called internally EverythingData (Fig. 5). 

Fig 5:  Schematic overview about the relationship between EverythingData, Ghostwriter and RAG 

in general (Slide from Mayr et al., 2025). 398 Part 5: Retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) 

Fig 6:  Schematic overview about the Ghostwriter workflow (Slide from Mayr et al., 2025). 

The Ghostwriter workflow entails an interface that enables the user to ask questions 

in natural language. Fig. 6 gives an schematic overview of the workflow. In this figure 

(Fig. 6) the workflow has been applied to another application case: namely a collection of 

articles from the Methods, Data and Analysis journal (for more details see Tykhonov at el., 

2025). The query result is presented as a natural language summary together with a list of 

relevant hits. The innovation for both LLMs and RAG is that the presented list of results 

does not rely on term or phrase matches only, but that the suggested sources resonate 

in some wider sense – either based on patterns in natural language (LLMs) and/or based 

on concepts expressions (RAG) – with the query. Based on complex stochastic models 

the idea is to better capture the semantic meaning of the original question, and suggest 

related sources. Ghostwriter has been tested for various collections. Among them are the 

webcollection of the Now.Museum (Vion-Dury et al., 2023) and (as mentioned above) a

test collection from a paper archive of the journal Methods, Data and Analysis (Tykhonov et 

al., 2025). 

The design of the MuseIT ShareMusic repository offered another possibility to test 

Ghostwriter . In this case, as visible in Fig. 3, the Knowledge Base Interface contains a but -

ton “Ask our Assistant”. This button can be found next to the usual area where a search 

query can be entered using free text. When clicking on this button, the user is guided 

to another interface (see Fig. 7). Here, another free text field is available for asking a

question about the collection. Fig. 7 displays a snapshot for the question “which perfor -

mances does the collection contain?”. This search once executed leads to a refreshed web -

site which contains an answer given in natural language (Answer section), and a section 

(Sources) in which a number of most relevant datasets from the collection are listed. In 

its current form, the interface allows the user to re-iterate their question, while the re -

sponse always comes in a combination of natural language and lists of hits. This way, the 

user is invited to explore a collection, rather than being guided in a seamless way. Scharnhorst, Yang, Touber, Ferguson, Mayr, and Tykhonov: Co-creation of AI technology 399 

Fig. 7:  Example for the use of the local chatbot on a collection – ShareMusic case 

This form of an AI agent can meanwhile be found in many web-based information 

service systems, the most known mundane one is possibly the AI assistant in Google 

Search. As we will touch upon in the conclusion, this cannot come as a surprise, if one 

looks into the collaboration pattern among engineers providing services (commercial 

and public) for information navigation. The interesting aspect of such ‘chatting with …’ 

approaches for a collection in the cultural (heritage) sector, is that the chatbot runs lo -

cally. Although the Ghostwriter workflow – as described above in the RAG literature re -

view – relies on ready-made LLMs, there is a possibility to use other LLM models devel -

oped under greater transparency and with a possibility that such LLM models are also 

being trained locally. To which extent such ‘AI assistants’ will be embraced by users, and 

meet the interaction needs, will have to be studied scientifically. But, the engineering 

journey in the MuseIT case shows that public sector institutions do not need to wait un -

til commercial solutions are ready. On the contrary, with their specific and often ‘out of 

the box’ requirements they play an important role in co-shaping such new forms of tech -

nology. We discuss this a bit more systematically in the next concluding section. 

# 3. Conclusion 

The exercise of developing the repositories for MuseIT, complete with chatbot for inno -

vative search functionalities, shows on a more abstract level how public knowledge in -

frastructures can benefit from trading zones (Gallison 1997) where a variety of actors (sci -

entists, heritage professionals, engineers, etc.) come together and co-create technology, 

while reflecting on its meaning and function at the same time. In this conclusion we re -

flect about the process “Co-creating AI technology’. Here we rely on a specific conceptual 

model which formalises how actors collaborate in knowledge and research infrastruc -

tures, and which allows us to discern the elements necessary to create such a trading 

zone. This model is the so-called Global Open Research Commons (GORC). 400 Part 5: Retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) 

While MuseIT is a specific case, with specific needs, it is also typical for the use/adop -

tion of new technologies among institutions which operate at the boundary between 

academia and the wider public. As we flagged out before some of the MuseIT partners 

constitute institutions and services which are part of the research infrastructure. Re -

search infrastructures are often conceptionalised as facilities, instruments, services 

provided to support research. What is less in the focus are the institutional carriers of 

those functionalities. Despite the lack of a shared definition of a research infrastructure 

(Morselli 2023) there is a wider discourse about research infrastructures and a quest for 

a terminology or model to capture various aspects of its function. One of these models 

is the Global Open Research Commons (GORC) (Treloar and Woodfoord 2024) devel -

oped by an Interest Group of the Research Data Alliance over the last couple years, and 

meanwhile applied in various contexts (Treloar, Woodford et al. 2025). The motivation 

to develop the GORC model emerged from the concern to keep scholarly outputs (pub -

lications, data, software and workflows) as commons – public goods in a situation where 

knowledge production in and outside academia are genuinely interwoven. As we will 

use some concepts of this model to reflect on the questions put out in the introduction, 

let us first give a summary of the model. 

# 3.1 Global open research commons – a lens to look at the adoption 

# of technological innovation 

The GORC model is based on a typology of nine essential elements which all need to be 

in scope when considering to what extent a research infrastructure service, operation 

of an institution, or a network activity is devoted to Open Science and the idea of Re -

search Commons. Consequently, it can be applied both as a framework for discussion as 

well as a non-prescriptive ‘check-list’ of possible considerations. As a heuristic device the 

model itself is in ongoing development, and the position, names and detailed definition 

of elements and their relationship will change over time. Still, and this makes it so suit -

able for this conclusion section, GORC reminds us in a very elegant way that knowledge 

production combines epistemic and social-communicative processes; that research in -

frastructure is never only about provided services; that technological innovation is about 

new ideas, but also about social, communicative, economic and political processes if it 

comes to the adoption of a technological innovation. The more profound the technolog -

ical change, the more important these mutual dependencies. 

The GORC model is best summarised in the visualisation below (Fig. 8). All elements 

shown in this schema are high level concepts necessary to be addressed when enabling 

Research Commons. The five elements placed in the upper part of the visualisation (with 

a white background) represent the norms and values to be followed when constructing a

truly research commons. In them, the human factor prevails. The three elements (in blue) 

below represent the ways in which interaction with the research infrastructure takes 

place, and their nature is more technically defined. The middle element Standards (in dark 

blue) stands for a needed connector, coordinator between the norms, values, means and 

the technical feature. All elements together are needed to create a research commons. Scharnhorst, Yang, Touber, Ferguson, Mayr, and Tykhonov: Co-creation of AI technology 401 

Fig. 8:  Essential Elements of the GORC model 

Similar to the concept of knowledge infrastructures (Edwards et al., 2013) which a decade 

earlier shed light on the collective nature of knowledge production and the necessary em -

beddings for knowledge production to happen, the GORC model highlights the necessity 

for interwovenness between soft skills or the human factor and the technological aspects 

down to their tangible manifestation in machines (Treloar et al. 2025). 

The model has been already tested by network organisations such as the European 

Grid Initiative (EGI,  https://www.egi.eu/ ), or national organisations providing research 

infrastructure services as SURF in the Netherlands, and CSC in Finland. But, it is cur -

rently also used to coordinate the establishment of various national and thematic nodes 

for the European Open Science Cloud (EOSC). Beyond its use in such rather institu -

tional settings, testing the maturity of methodology might be another field of applica -

tion. New workflows and tools as presented in these proceedings once they become stan -

dards and sometimes services (in a research infrastructure sense) come with additional 

requirements which can be described using elements of GORC such as Engagement, 

Skills and training, or Governance and Sustainability. 

But, the GORC model can also be useful to reflect about how projects oblige to Open 

Science and Research Commons norms. It complements in a way the already required 

data management plans by adding necessary ordering principles of the processes leading 

to Open Science. Returning to our concrete use case, the MuseIT project, we find many 

GORC elements being present in the process. From the networked nature of knowledge 

production follows that not all elements relevant for research commons are in one hand .

Different organisations might take care of various of those elements. But only if they 

interact together based on clearly defined rules – as e.g. represented in standards for 402 Part 5: Retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) 

interoperability, a research commons can truly emerge and issues of sustainability can 

be addressed. 

In MuseIT, we see scientific institutions and SMEs taking care of specific aspects of 

the more technical elements. They partly execute fundamental new research for these ar -

eas and partly take care of the implementation cases. DANS as a research infrastructure 

organisation delivered consultancy for a variety of those elements. The work of other or -

ganisations – like ShareMusic – could be best located with respect to elements such as 

Engagement and Sustainability. Part of the success of MuseIT’s aspiration concerning 

setting up a new kind of repository relied on the re-use of technology already developed 

(Dataverse) which in itself addresses elements of research commons. In particular, the 

use of standards such as Croissant (Akthar et al. 2024) as part of the Dataverse produc -

tion system, created the foundation on which experiments with RAG could be executed. 

# 3.2 Position of archives and other institutions of the GLAM sector in the current 

# race for new AI technologies 

As has been stated very clearly in the review paper of Simons et al. (2026) there is a clear 

divide in terms of skills between those who build LLMs and experiment with AI tech -

nologies and those who ‘apply’ ready-made tools. As the auhors express, “[i]n this land -

scape, LLM literacy becomes essential: not just technical skill, but interpretive awareness 

of how models work, what assumptions they encode, and how they shape inquiry. These 

issues also raise broader questions of accountability and the politics of research infras -

tructure”. A recent report of SURF on Technological Trends (SURF 2025) explicitly names 

the lack of ‘prompt-engineering’ skills as an issue that needs to be addressed. This is noth -

ing new. Already concerning general computational skills it remains important that all 

participants in building research commons have a basic understanding of fundamental 

principles on which machines operate. Looking into the history of AI debates can be very 

enlightening here (e.g., Kurzweil 1990). But, there is also no going back to a situation 

where everybody involved is a universalist. Current bodies of knowledge are very differ -

entiated, detailed and far too large for one person – even with the help of machines – to 

overlook. Division of labour or skills and collaboration have been answers for such situ -

ations, and the application of AI/LLMs is no exception for this. But, we also know from 

studies of interdisciplinary work that more is needed to make collaboration effective: (1) 

arenas need to be created in which actors with various skills can meet and (2) a termi -

nology needs to be found to enable communication across epistemic borders. In other 

words trading zones are needed (Gallison, 1997). 

If such trading zones are not proactively organised, in the current AI debate various 

actors naturally will address those issues which fall into the realm of their own compe -

tence. For research infrastructure support institutions as DANS, the designated com -

munities for which DANS develops services rightly dominate the discourse. But having 

dimensions of mature services as a leading principle does not mean one can not engage 

in the shaping of technology itself. Archivists have never been passive executors of com -

munity needs (Borgman, Scharnhorst and Golshan, 2019); GLAM institutions become Scharnhorst, Yang, Touber, Ferguson, Mayr, and Tykhonov: Co-creation of AI technology 403 

strong in the adoption process of technological innovations when being able to co-cre -

ate 17  (Rodighiero et al., 2022). 

We know from innovation studies (Rogers 1962) that in the phase of technological 

change one always observes the phases of Early, Mid and Late Adopters. We know from 

the same field, that once a technology is ripe and has won a dominating place, a lock-in 

often is formed and alternatives stand no chance (Bruckner et al., 1994). This is why it is 

not only a nice to have but a necessary condition / sine qua non for adopters which epistemi -

cally might be farther away from the ‘fire’ where the technology emerges, to mingle, play, 

experiment with new technologies. Only by experiences in practice, chances of co-cre -

ation and co-shaping technology emerge. 

Project funding such as the one enabling MuseIT are the socio-economic bases for 

a trading zone around new AI technologies and their application and use in GLAM set -

tings. Looking at the MuseIT case of co-creating AI through the lens of the GORC model 

reveals which other ingredients beyond project funding are needed. The MuseIT consor -

tium brings various stakeholders together from academia, (small) industry, and the cul -

tural sector. As said above those stakeholders take care of various of the elements needed 

to produce research commons. They do this bringing their own expertise, infrastructure 

and past project results to the table. For DANS, the explorations around AI methods used 

for archives are part of a longer and broader engineering journey (see previous section). 

This is a journey that started with enabling a wider adoption of archival software stan -

dards (in this case Dataverse), while at the same time updating this same software with 

new methods, technologies – from machine-based linking of KOS specific KOS to the 

larger KOS universe to the local installation of a trained chatbot (an AI assistent). 

Looking at the path-dependencies in the development of Dataverse itself we also see 

links to movements like agile or pop-up digital data infrastructures (Tykhonov 2020) 

which were developed during the COVID pandemics. But, there are also links to cur -

rent incubator networks such as the ML Commons (https://mlcommons.org/working-g 

roups/data/croissant/ ) which brings together engineers from industry and the public 

sector with computer scientists and engineers located in academia to explore new stan -

dards – like the Croissant standard. These new alliances acknowledge the emergence of 

what sometimes in the history of the AI discourse has been called a ‘science-engineer’ 

making a metaphorical reference to the artist-engineer of the renaissance 18  (Haug et al., 

2012) 

The GORC model reminds us how in the process to achieve research commons – ac -

tually for any type of knowledge commons – technical aspects, organisation of work -

flows and embracing of communities come together. In the case of the Dataverse in -                                                                                                

> 17 See as an example the AI Explorer of the Harvard Museum https://ai.harvardartmuseums.org/ab
> out (Accessed November 20, 2025).
> 18 Quotation from Historisch-Kritisches Wörterbuch des Marxismus, Bd. 8/1, Künstliche Intelligenz:
> [Dass KI] “einen neuen Typ von Wissenschaftler-Ingenieur hervorgebracht hat, vergleichbar dem
> Künstler-Ingenieur in der Renaissance (RAMMERT 1995, 14), gilt nicht nur für die Ingenieurselite.
> TURINGS revolutionäre Leistung wurzelt im verallgemeinerbaren Aspekt seiner geschichtlich
> neuartigen Integration von Hand-und Kopfarbeit, van Theorie und experimentierendem Ein -
> greifen in Maschinerie.” Historisch-Kritisches Wörterbuch des Marxismus, Bd. 8/1, Künstliche Intel -
> ligenz. For the comparison to the Renaissance see also Zilsel (1942), Rossi (1962), and Long (2011). 404 Part 5: Retrieval-augmented generation (RAG)

stance for ShareMusic in the MuseIT project, the requirements of the organisation to 

organise, archive, preserve and make accessible of their own collection were leading. The 

KOS features the organisation eventually chose had to be practical for the working of 

the guardians and curators of the cultural assets, but also practical for the interaction 

with the material. Given the specific communities with and for which this organisa -

tion works, information retrieval tools had to adhere to new forms of interacting with 

material. These requirements influenced the search process for which type of AI sup -

ported method in multimodal representation would be interesting to be tested. This, as 

described above, could be the description of an image or the reading of a text. The imple -

mentation of a local AI assistant extends the possibilities to ‘explore’ the content of the 

collection. As pointed out in the RAG literature review, RAG supports an information re -

trieval paradigm in which the empowerment of the user is central. Instead of seamlessly 

paving the way – the reference systems, the KOS as ordering principles, remain visible. 

The user is guided but not blind-folded, he/she is invited to explore on their own terms. 

Let us at the end of these conclusions return to the questions we posed in the intro -

duction and present possible answers based on our experiences. 

• What is the position of archives and other institutions of the GLAM sector which are 

stakeholders for public knowledge commons in the current race for new AI technolo -

gies? 

• Archives and other institutions in the GLAM sector are excellent co-creation part -

ners in shaping new AI technologies. They adhere to principles of public knowl -

edge commons and with their specific function come requirements which often 

pose new puzzles to the engineering process. Practice is eventually the test for 

any new technology, and the cultural sector often has played a pioneering role 

due to its variety of needs and practices. 

• How can institutions in the public sector be part of the early adopter cohort and this 

way also co-design technology? 

• To be able to become a partner of equal rights, arenas are needed where co-cre -

ation can take place, and trading zones between different epistemics and bodies 

of knowledge can occur. Project funding combining research and innovation ac -

tivities can help to create such arenas of encounter and exploration temporally. 

• To ensure sustainability, these projects, at best, are embedded into the exper -

tise of the participating institutions. Those usually operate in wider networks 

of projects extending along the timeline (from past, present into future). Also 

other cross-sectoral activities as working groups of network organisation (e.g. 

on new standards) which bring engineering and scientific expertise from the re -

search and implementation front together support this process of co-creation 

and co-design. 

• To which extent new AI driven Information Retrieval approaches as described in our 

use case empower both content producers and content consumers? 

• The Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) framework is discussed both from 

a more fundamental methodological angle as well as for various applications 

in different contributions to these proceedings (see Büttner, 2026; Grasshoff, 

2026; Hill, 2026; Meding and Daugs, 2026a; Schlattmann, 2026; and Simons et Scharnhorst, Yang, Touber, Ferguson, Mayr, and Tykhonov: Co-creation of AI technology 405 

al., 2026). As Meding and Daugs (2026a) formulated “RAG shifts the epistemic 

burden from the model’s internal weights to verifiable information”. While 

RAG by no means is easily traceable and transparent to the user, we agree with 

Hill (2026) that “RAG occupies an epistemic middle ground, underscoring that 

researcher judgment and reflexivity are constitutive of knowledge production. 

So, we see RAG as a promising direction for enhancing the reliability, trans -

parency, and adaptability of AI systems in knowledge-intensive applications. 

It explicitly builds on existing knowledge as visible in structure information 

(Merono Penuela et al., 2025). RAG rather aims to empower users to use their 

own epistemic capacities than to seamlessly (and intransparent) paving their 

path through the large information spaces. 

As these proceedings show, the power of new technologies unfold more forcefully when 

paired with reflection. If one wishes to influence new technologies, engaging in co-cre -

ation from the very start is preferable to debating in the aftermath. The occurrence of 

lock-in’s (Bruckner et al. 1994) seems to be almost unavoidable in technological inno -

vation. In complex systems, as the societies we live in are, it is impossible to find one 

optimum – right for all needs and interests. But without documenting and reflecting 

on the processes from a perspective of knowledge and science dynamics – often called 

meta-level – the chances to influence technological innovation are nil. Such reflections 

are needed in the sciences themselves, beyond academia adopters, but at best appear as 

often as possible in those grey areas at the borders between fine and firm lined epistemics 

spaces where various practices meet. Practices which reach from the creation and preser -

vation of art, performance, culture to engineering machines which support human cre -

ativity. The LLM workshop carries the aspiration of such a wide horizon and inspired this 

specific contribution. 19 

# References 

Arslan M, Munawar S and Cruz C. (2024) Business insights using RAG–LLMs: 

a review and case study. Journal of Decision Systems , pp. 1–30, doi: 

10.1080/12460125.2024.2410040 

Akthar M, Benjelloun O, Conforti C, Foschini L, Gijsbers P, Giner Miguelez J, Goswami 

S, Jain N, Karamousadakis M, Krishna S, Kuchnik M, Lesage S, Lhoest Q, Marcenac 

P, Maskey M, Mattson P, Oala L, Oderinwale H, Ruyssen P, Santos Rajat Shinde T, 

Simperl E, Suresh A, Thomas G, Tykhonov V, Vanschoren J, Varma S, Van der Velde 

J, Vogler S, Wu CJ, Zhang L. (2024). Croissant: A Metadata Format for ML-Ready 

Datasets. In: 38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) :                                                                   

> 19 In section 1.1. of this chapter DeepL, Grammarly, and ChatGPT have been used for grammar check -
> ing and text polishing. Further, no other support of LLM's was used. All model-generated text was
> reviewed and, where necessary, rewritten by the authors, who remain fully responsible for the final
> version. For details on the use of LLMs in this volume, see the statement in the volume's introduc -
> tion. 406 Part 5: Retrieval-augmented generation (RAG)

Track on Datasets and Benchmarks NeurIPS.  https://ai.meta.com/research/public 

ations/croissant-a-metadata-format-for-ml-ready-datasets/ 

Asai A, Wu Z, Wang Y, Sil A, Hajishirziet H (2024) Self-RAG: Learning to retrieve, gener -

ate, and critique through self-reflection. In NeurIPS 2023 workshop on instruction 

tuning and instruction following. Preprint:  https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.11511 

Bartling S and Friesike S (eds) (2014) Opening Science: The Evolving Guide on How the Internet 

is Changing Research, Collaboration and Scholarly Publishing . Springer Cham  https://doi 

.org/10.1007/978-3-319-00026-8 

Borgman C, Scharnhorst A and Golshan MS (2019) Digital data archives as knowledge 

infrastructures: Mediating data sharing and reuse. Journal of the Association for Infor -

mation Science and Technology 70(8):888-904. DOI: 10.1002/asi.24172; Preprint  https:// 

arxiv.org/abs/1802.02689 

Börner K (2010) Atlas of Science: Visualizing What We Know. Cambridge MA: MIT Press. 

Börner K (2015) Atlas of Knowledge: Anyone Can Map. Cambridge MA: MIT Press. 

Börner K (2021) Atlas of Forecasts: Modeling and Mapping Desirable Futures. Cambridge 

MA: MIT Press. 

Börner K, Record EG, Theriault T (2025) Atlas of Macroscopes: Interactive Data Visual -

izations. Cambridge MA: MIT Press. 

Boyd C (2025) AI and The Dataverse Project: Using AI to Benefit Research Data Commu -

nity Members. Presentation given Thursday, September 11, 2025 at IBICT, Brasília, 

Brazil. Slides  https://dataverse.org/presentations/ai-and-dataverse-project-using-

ai-benefit-research-data-community-members  (Accessed November 10, 2025). 

Brown TB, Mann B, Ryder N, Subbiah M, Kaplan J, Dhariwal P et al. (2020) Lan -

guage models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems 

33 : 1877–1901. 

Bruckner E, Ebeling W, Jiménez-Montaño MA, Scharnhorst A. (1994) Hyperselection and 

Innovation Described by a Stochastic Model of Technological Evolution. In: Leydes -

dorff L, Van den Besselaar P (Eds) Evolutionary Economics and Chaos Theory . London: 

Pinter, pp. 79–90. 

Büttner J (2026) Why pursue temporally-grounded AI for historical disciplines, and what 

makes it so challenging? In: Simons A, Wüthrich A, Zichert M, et al. (eds) Understand -

ing Science with Large Language Models? Potentials for the History, Philosophy, and Sociology 

of Science . Bielefeld: transcript, part-2. 

Cáceres J P, and Chafe C (2010) JackTrip: Under the Hood of an Engine for Network Audio. 

Journal of New Music Research 39(3):183–187.  https://doi.org/10.1080/09298215.2010.48 

1361 

Crosas M (2017) Cloud Dataverse: A Data Repository Platform for the Cloud. In: CIO 

Review Open Stack. Available at  https://openstack.cioreview.com/cxoinsight/cloud 

-dataverse-a-data-repository-platform-for-the-cloud-nid-24199-cid-120.html  (Ac -

cessed November 5, 2025). 

Daga E, Daquino M, Fournier-S’niehotta R, Guillotel-Nothmann C, and Scharnhorst 

A (2023) Documenting the research process. Opportunities and challenges for Bib -

liometrics and Information Retrieval. In: Frommholz I, Mayr P, Cabanac G, Ver -

berne S and Brennan J (Eds.), Proceedings of the 13th International Workshop on Biblio -

metric-enhanced Information Retrieval co-located with 45th European Conference on Informa -Scharnhorst, Yang, Touber, Ferguson, Mayr, and Tykhonov: Co-creation of AI technology 407 

tion Retrieval (ECIR 2023) pp. 4–20. (CEUR Workshop Proceedings; Vol. 3617). CEUR-

WS.org.  https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.10529113 

De Vries J, Tykhonov V, Scharnhorst A, Indarto E, Priddy M, and Admiraal F (2022) Flex -

ible Metadata Schemes for Research Data Repositories. The Common Framework in 

Dataverse and the CMDI Use Case. In: Monachini M and Eskevich M (Eds.): Selected 

Papers from the CLARIN Annual Conference 2021 : Virtual Event, 2021, 27–29 Septem -

ber (Vol. 189, pp. 168–180). (Linköping Electronic Conference Proceedings; Vol. 189). 

Linköping University Electronic Press, Linköpings universitet.  https://doi.org/10.33 

84/9789179294441 

Domingues A, Jain N, Merono Penuela A, and Simperl E (2024) Bringing Back Seman -

tics to Knowledge Graph Embeddings: An Interpretability Approach. In: Besold TR, 

d’Avila Garcez A, Jimenez-Ruiz E, Madhyastha P, Wagner B, and Confalonieri R (Eds.) 

Neural-Symbolic Learning and Reasoning – 18th International Conference, NeSy 2024, Pro -

ceedings , Vol. 14979, pp. 192–203. Article Chapter 17 (Lecture Notes in Computer Sci -

ence (including subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence and Lecture Notes 

in Bioinformatics); Vol. 14980 LNAI). Springer, Cham.  https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3 

-031-71170-1_17 

Edge D, Trinh H, Cheng N, Bradley J, Chao A, Mody A, Truitt S, Metropolitansky D, Ness 

RO, Larson J (2024) From local to global: A graph RAG approach to query-focused 

summarization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.16130. 

Edwards PN, Jackson SJ, Chalmers MK, Bowker GC, Borgman CL, Ribes D, Burton M, 

and Calvert S (2013) Knowledge Infrastructures: Intellectual Frameworks and Research Chal -

lenges. Ann Arbor: Deep Blue.  http://hdl.handle.net/2027.42/97552  .

Galison P (1997) Image and Logic: A Material Culture of Microphysics . Chicago: University of 

Chicago Press 

Gao Y, Xiong Y, Gao X, Jia K, Pan J, Bi Y, Dai Y, Sun J, Wang M, Wang H (2023) Re -

trieval-augmented generation for large language models: A survey. . arXiv preprint 

arXiv:2312.10997, 2(1). 

Graßhoff G (2026) AI-Reporter: a path to a new genre of scientific communication. From 

presentation to publication through agentic LLMs. In: Simons A, Wüthrich A, Zichert 

M, et al. (eds) Understanding Science with Large Language Models? Potentials for the History, 

Philosophy, and Sociology of Science . Bielefeld: transcript, part-5. 

Guéret C, Chambers T, Reijnhoudt L, Van der Most F and Scharnhorst A (2013). Generic -

ity versus expressivity – an exercise in semantic interoperable research information 

systems for Web Science [Digital Libraries, WebSci ’13 Conference, Paris]  http://arxi 

v.org/abs/1304.5743 

Guirguis K, Eskandar G, Wang M, Kayser M, Monari E, Yang B, Beyerer J (2024) Un -

certainty-based forgetting mitigation for generalized few-shot object detection. In 

Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recog -

nition Workshops (CVPRW), Seattle, WA, USA, 2024, pp. 2586–2595, doi: 10.1109/ 

CVPRW63382.2024.00265 

Haug WF, Haug F, Jehle P, Küttler W (Eds) (2012) Historisch-kritisches Wörterbuch des 

Marxismus.  Volume 8.1. Publisher Argument. 

Hill M (2026) The data interview. Reflexive integration of large language models in quali -

tative content analysis. In: Simons A, Wüthrich A, Zichert M, et al. (eds) Understanding 408 Part 5: Retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) 

Science with Large Language Models? Potentials for the History, Philosophy, and Sociology of 

Science . Bielefeld: transcript, part-5. 

Hołyst JA, Mayr P, Thelwall M, Frommholz I, Havlin S, Sela A, Kenett YN, Helic D, Rehar 

A, Maček SR, Kazienko P, Kajdanowicz T, Biecek P, Szymanski BK and Sienkiewicz J

(2024) Protect our environment from information overload. Nature Human Behaviour 

8(3): 402–403. 

Jiang Z, Xu F, Gao L, Sun Z, Liu Q, Dwivedi-Yu J, Yang Y, Callan J, and Neubig G

(2023) Active Retrieval Augmented Generation. In: Bouamor H, Pino J, Bali K (Eds) 

Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process -

ing , pages 7969–7992, Singapore. Association for Computational Linguistics. Doi 

10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.495 

Johansson M, Tykhonov V, Alexandersson S, Ferguson K, Hanlon J, Scharnhorst A. and 

Osborne N (2025) A Knowledge Base for Arts and Inclusion – The Dataverse Data 

Archival Platform as a Knowledge Base Management System Enabling Multimodal 

Accessibility. In: Wei J and Margetis G (eds) Human-Centered Design, Operation and 

Evaluation of Mobile Communications . HCII 2025. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 

vol 15824. Springer, Cham.  https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-93064-5_19  Preprint 

available: arXiv:2504.05976 

Kontogiannis S, Christodoulou G, Papadopoulos V, Iosif M, Kosmides P, Johansson, 

M, Darányi S, Van Erven T, Tykhonov V, Ferguson KB, Scharnhorst A, Meroño-

Peñuela A, Farina A and McGillivray B (2025) MuseIT repository release. D6.3. 

(draft)  https://pure.knaw.nl/ws/portalfiles/portal/2184570845/D6.3_-_MuseIT_repo 

sitory_release.pdf 

Kurzweil R (1990) The Age of Intelligent Machines . Cambridge MA: MIT press. 

Long PO (2011) Artisan/Practitioners and the Rise of the New Sciences 1400–1600. Cor -

vallis: Oregon State University Press 

Lewis P, Perez E, Piktus A, Petroni F, Karpukhin V and Goyal N (2020) Retrieval-Aug -

mented Generation for Knowledge-Intensive NLP Tasks. In: Advances in Neural Infor -

mation Processing Systems 33 (ed Larochelle H, Ranzato M, Hadsell R et al.), Vancouver 

BC, Canada, 6 – 12 December 2020: 9459–74. 

Liu Y (2024) The application of RAG technology in traditional Chinese medicine. In: 2024 

International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Communication (ICAIC 2024) 

(pp. 402–408). Atlantis Press. DOI: 10.2991/978-94-6463-512-6_43 

Mayr P, Tykhonov S, Touber J, and Scharnhorst, A (2025) Chatting with Papers – the 

mixed use of LLMs and semantic artifacts to support the understanding of science 

dynamics. Presentation given at the workshop Large Language Models for the History, 

Philosophy, and Sociology of Science , April 2–4, 2025, Technische Universität Berlin, Ger -

many. Organized jointly by: Gerd Graßhoff (HU Berlin), Arno Simons (TU Berlin), 

Adrian Wüthrich (TU Berlin), and Michael Zichert (TU Berlin). More information 

available at:  https://www.tu.berlin/hps-mod-sci/llms-for-hpss/workshop-llms-for-

hpss  (Accessed November 10, 2025). Slides Zenodo.  https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.1 

7242902 

Meding H and Daugs A (2026a) From RAGs to rich responses. Enhancing LLM reliabil -

ity through retrieval-augmented generation. In: Simons A, Wüthrich A, Zichert M, Scharnhorst, Yang, Touber, Ferguson, Mayr, and Tykhonov: Co-creation of AI technology 409 

et al. (eds) Understanding Science with Large Language Models? Potentials for the History, 

Philosophy, and Sociology of Science . Bielefeld: transcript, part-5. 

Meding H and Daugs A (2026b) On the use and limitations of large language models in 

historical scholarship. In: Simons A, Wüthrich A, Zichert M, et al. (eds) Understanding 

Science with Large Language Models? Potentials for the History, Philosophy, and Sociology of 

Science . Bielefeld: transcript, part-1. 

Merono Penuela A (2016) Refining Statistical Data on the Web . PhD-Thesis Vrije Universiteit 

Amsterdam 

Merono Penuela A, Simperl E, Kurteva A and Reklos I (2025) KG.gov: Knowledge Graphs 

as the Backbone of Data Governance in AI. Journal of Web Semantics 85, 100847. 

Morselli F (2023) Co-creation dynamics in a European Research Infrastructure Consortium 

(ERIC): The case of the DARIAH-ERIC Working Groups . PhD-Thesis. Università degli Stu -

di di Verona.  https://hdl.handle.net/20.500.14242/115602 

Morselli F, Touber J, and Scharnhorst A (2025).  Fostering Data Communities – perspec -

tive from a Data Archive Service Provider. Preprint.  https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.0232 

1

Myers J and Tykhonov V (2023). A Plug-in Approach to Controlled Vocabulary Support in 

Dataverse. Report. Zenodo.  https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.8133723 

Nie E, Shao B, Wang M, Ding Z, Schmid H, and Schuetze H (2025) BMIKE-53: Investigat -

ing Cross-Lingual Knowledge Editing with In-Context Learning. In: Che W, Nabende 

J, Shutova E, Pilehvar MT (Eds) Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association 

for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 16357–16374, Vienna, Aus -

tria. Association for Computational Linguistics. DOI: 10.18653/v1/2025.acl-long.798 

Ntonga M, Pokorny J, and Olson N (2023) The MuseIT Project: co-designing inclusive 

technologies for better access to culture. DigItalia 18(1): 187–190.  https://digitalia.c 

ultura.gov.it/article/view/3009 

Nyberg Åkerström W, Baumann K, Corcho O, David R, Le Franc Y, Madon B, Magagna B, 

Micsik A, Molinaro M, Ojsteršek M, Peroni S, Scharnhorst A, Vogt L, and Widmann 

H (2024) Developing and implementing the semantic interoperability recommenda -

tions of the EOSC Interoperability Framework (18 January 2024). EOSC Semantic In -

teroperability Task Force.  https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.10518860 

Rafailov, R. et al. (2023) Direct preference optimization: Your language model is secretly 

a reward model. Advances in neural information processing systems, 36, pp.53728-

53741. 

Rodighiero D, Derry L, Duhaime D, Kruguer J, Mueller MC, Pietsch C, Schnapp JT, Stew -

ard J metaLAB (2022) Surprise machines: Revealing Harvard Art Museums’ image 

collection. Information Design Journal 27(1):21-34,DOI:  https://doi.org/10.1075/idj.220 

13.rod 

Rogers EM (1962) Diffusion of Innovations . New York: The Free Press 

Rossi P (1962) I Filosofi e le macchine: 1400–1700.  Milano: Feltrinelli 

Scharnhorst A and Smiraglia RP (2021) The Need for Knowledge Organization. Introduc -

tion to the book Linking Knowledge (Chapter 1). In: Smiraglia RP and Scharnhorst 

A (Eds.) Linking Knowledge: Linked Open Data for Knowledge Organization and Visualiza -

tion . Baden-Baden: Ergon –Nomos. Pp. 1–23,  https://doi.org/10.5771/9783956506611-

1 , Preprint:  http://arxiv.org/abs/2204.14041 410 Part 5: Retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) 

Schlattmann R, Kaye A and Vogl M (2026) From source to structure. Extracting knowl -

edge graphs with LLMs. In: Simons A, Wüthrich A, Zichert M, et al. (eds) Understand -

ing Science with Large Language Models? Potentials for the History, Philosophy, and Sociology 

of Science . Bielefeld: transcript, part-4. 

Shi, F. et al. (2023) Large language models can be easily distracted by irrelevant context. 

In: International Conference on Machine Learning (pp. 31210–31227). PMLR. 

Simons A, Arnaout H and Gurevych I (2026) Reconstructive citation context analysis us -

ing large language models. A roadmap. In: Simons A, Wüthrich A, Zichert M, et al. 

(eds) Understanding Science with Large Language Models? Potentials for the History, Philoso -

phy, and Sociology of Science . Bielefeld: transcript, part-6. 

Simons A, Zichert M and Wüthrich A (2026) Large language models for history, philoso -

phy, and sociology of science: Interpretive uses, methodological challenges, and crit -

ical perspectives. Studies in History and Philosophy of Science 117: 102151.  https://doi.org 

/10.1016/j.shpsa.2026.102151 .

SURF (2025). SURF Tech Trends 2026. Utrecht. Online available:  https://www.surf.nl/file 

s/cocoon_media_files/surf-tech-trends-2026_ttr26.pdf  (Access November 20, 2025) 

Treloar A, Woodford CJ, Genova F, Harrower N, Scharnhorst A, Teperek M, Tsang E, Do -

ran M, Ferrari T, Gregory K, Grossman R, Hoogerwerf M, Hugo W, Jetten M, Matas 

LJ, Miedema M, Macneil R, Newbold E, Parland-von Essen J, Sesink L, Nyberg Åker -

ström W (2025). Making the Global Open Research Commons Truly Global: A report from the 

Lorentz Workshop , July 21–25 2025. DOI:  https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.17230153 .

Treloar A and Woodford CJ (2024) Global Open Research Commons: Creating an Inter -

national Model for Improved Interoperability and Collaboration. Data Science Journal 

23(56) pp. 1–9. DOI:  https://doi.org/10.5334/dsj-2024-056 

Tykhonov V (2020) CoronaWhy: Fight against COVID-19. Video of a presentation. Avail -

able at  https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9SvZleFO_Tk  (Accessed November 5, 

2025). Presentation for the CoronaWhy network. Slides available at  https://doi.org 

/10.5281/zenodo.17533272 .

Tykhonov V and Olson N (2023) Dataverse integration of multimodalities with external 

controlled vocabularies in the MuseIT project. Presentation. Zenodo.  https://doi.org 

/10.5281/zenodo.8139739 

Tykhonov V, Yang H, Mayr P, Touber J, Scharnhorst A (2025) Chatting with Papers: A Hy -

brid Approach Using LLMs and Knowledge Graphs. Paper accepted at Joint Work -

shop of the 5th AI + Informetrics (AII) and the 6th Extraction and Evaluation of 

Knowledge Entities from Scientific Documents (EEKE). Preprint:  https://doi.org/1 

0.48550/arXiv.2505.11633 

Upadhayay B, Behzadan V and Karbasi A (2024) Cognitive overload attack: Prompt injec -

tion for long context. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.11272. 

Vion-Dury J, Tykhonov V, Scharnhorst A and Rozenholc Y (2023). Building an Infrastruc -

ture for Cultural Heritage of the Present. Presentation given at „Cultural Heritage 

Data as Humanities Research Data? – DARIAH Annual Event 2023“, Zenodo. Slides, 

https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.8042824 

Wang R, Zhao Q, Yan Y, Zha D, Chen Y, Yu S, Liu Z, Wang Y, Wang S, Han X, Liu Z, Sun 

M (2024) DeepNote: Note-centric deep retrieval-augmented generation. Preprint 

arXiv:2410.08821.  https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.08821 Scharnhorst, Yang, Touber, Ferguson, Mayr, and Tykhonov: Co-creation of AI technology 411 

Wang S, Zhu Y, Liu H, Zheng Z, Chen C, Li J (2025a) Knowledge Editing for Large Lan -

guage Models: A Survey. ACM Comput. Surv. 57(3), Article 59, pp. 1–37  https://doi.org 

/10.1145/3698590 

Wang M, Stoll A, Lange L, Adel H, Schütze H, Strötgen J (2025b) Bring your own 

knowledge: A survey of methods for LLM knowledge expansion. arXiv preprint 

arXiv:2502.12598  https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.12598 

Wei J, Bosma M, Zhao VY, Guu K, Wei Yu A, Lester B, Du N, Dai AM, Le QV (2022a) Fine -

tuned Language Models are Zero-Shot Learners. The Tenth International Conference 

on Learning Representations, ICLR 2022, Virtual Event, April 25–29, 2022. Preprint 

2021:  https://arxiv.org/abs/2109.01652 

Wei J, Wang X, Schuurmans D, Bosma M, Ichter B, Xia F, Chi EH, Le QV, Zhou D (2022b) 

Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. NIPS’22: 

Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Neural Information Processing 

Systems, Article No. 1800, Pages 24824 – 24837 

Wilkinson MD, Dumontier M, Aalbersberg IJ, Appleton G, Axton M, Baak A, Blomberg 

N, Boiten J, Da Silva Santos LB, Bourne PE, Bouwman J, Brookes AJ, Clark T, Crosas 

M, Dillo I, Dumon O, Edmunds S, Evelo CT, Finkers R, Gonzalez-Beltran A, Gray AJD, 

Groth P, Goble C, Grethe JS, Heringa J, ’t Hoen PAC, Hooft R, Kuhn T, Kok R, Kok J, 

Lusher SJ, Martone ME, Mons A, Packer AL, Persson B, Rocca-Serra P, Roos M, Van 

Schaik R, Sansone S, Schultes E, Sengstag T, Slater T, Strawn G, Swertz MA, Thomp -

son M, Van der Lei L, Van Mulligen E, Velterop J, Waagmeester A, Wittenburg P, Wol -

stencroft K, Zhao J and Mons B (2016) The FAIR Guiding Principles for scientific data 

management and stewardship. Nature Scientific Data 3 (160018)  https://doi.org/10.103 

8/sdata.2016.18 

Wittenberg M, Tykhonov V, Indarto E, Steinhoff W, Veld LHI, Kasberger S, Conzett P, 

Concordia C, Kiraly P, and Parkoła T (2022) D5.5 ’Archive in a Box’ repository software 

and proof of concept of centralised installation in the cloud. Deliverable of the EC 

funded project ‘Social Sciences and Humanities Open Cloud’ (SSHOC), Grant agree -

ment ID: 823782,  https://doi.org/10.3030/823782  Paper published at Zenodo  https:// 

doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.6676391 

Wu M, Liu Z, Yan Y, Li X, Yu S, Zeng Z, Gu Y, Yu G (2025) RankCoT: Refining knowledge for 

retrieval-augmented generation through ranking chain-of-thoughts. In: Proceed -

ings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 

pp. 12857–12874.  https://aclanthology.org › 2025.acl-long.629.pdf  Preprint:  https://a 

rxiv.org/abs/2502.17888 

Yan SQ, Gu JC, Zhu Y, Ling ZH (2024) Corrective retrieval-augmented generation. arXiv 

preprint arXiv:2400.00000  https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.15884 

Zamborlini V, Van Wissen L, Merono Penuela A, and Van den Heuvel C. (2024).  On the 

Choice of Vocabularies for Archival Data. In: Italo O, Barcelos PPF, Calhau R, Fonseca 

CM, Righetti G (Eds) Proceedings of the Joint Ontology Workshops (JOWO) – Episode X: 

The Tukker Zomer of Ontology, and satellite events co-located with the 14th Interna -

tional Conference on Formal Ontology in Information Systems (FOIS 2024) Aachen: 

CEUR Workshop Proceedings, 1613–0073, 3882 

Zilsel E (1942) The Sociological Roots of Science . Chicago: University of Chicago Press 412 Part 5: Retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) 

# Acknowledgement 

This paper has been made possible by various research projects. First, the MuseIT project, 

coordinated by Nasrine Olson at Högskolan i Borås. MuseIT is co-funded by the Eu -

ropean Union (Project ID: 101061441). The work presented in this paper also builds on 

other projects such as Polifonia: a digital harmoniser for musical heritage knowledge (EU 

funded, Project ID 101004746), and SSHOC-NL, a Dutch funded research infrastructure 

project in the Social Sciences and Humanities. We would like to thank partners from the 

Now.Museum initiative (https://www.now.museum/now-museum/ ) for their support in 

the exploration. Part of the paper has been informed by participation in the FAIRImpact 

project (EU funded, Project ID 101057344). Han Yang received funding from the Deutsche 

Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) under grant number: MA 3964/15-3 (SocioHub project). 

Han Yang and Philipp Mayr received additional funding from the European Union under 

the Horizon Europe grant OMINO – Overcoming Multilevel INformation Overload un -

der grant number 101086321. We thank Andrew Treloar and CJ Woodford for comments 

on this paper.