Title: AB-RAG: Adaptive Budgeted Retrieval-Augmented Generation for Reliable Question Answering

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.29090v1

Published Time: Tue, 30 Jun 2026 00:50:52 GMT

Number of Pages: 16

Markdown Content:
# AB-RAG: Adaptive Budgeted Retrieval-Augmented Generation for Reliable Question Answering 

Ansh Kamthan 

Department of Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning Manipal University Jaipur 

Jaipur, India anshkamthan4@gmail.com 

Abstract —Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) has become the standard way to ground large language models in external knowledge, yet most systems retrieve a fixed number of passages for every question regardless of its difficulty. This wastes compu-tation on easy questions, starves hard ones, and gives no signal for when a generated answer can be trusted. With a growing share of question answering systems built on top of commercial language model APIs, a method that can decide how much to retrieve, and how far to trust its own answers, without retraining the underlying model, is of clear practical value. This paper presents AB-RAG (Adaptive Budgeted Retrieval-Augmented Generation), a training-free and backbone-agnostic framework that generates an answer, estimates its confidence from a combination of three signals, and then decides whether to stop or to retrieve more evidence, subject to a fixed retrieval budget. The estimator combines the model’s own certainty, the agreement between the answer and the evidence, and the variance of the retrieval scores. For models that expose token probabilities the certainty signal is read directly; for closed APIs it is approximated by self-consistency, so the method works without access to model internals. Across three backbones and two datasets, the central result is that the confidence estimate reliably separates correct from incorrect answers on every backbone, reaching a clean split of 57.6% against 0% Exact Match between high- and low-confidence answers on a factoid dataset. The adaptive policy improves accuracy on capable backbones, and the study reports its negative and nuanced findings honestly, including a confidence signal that proved unsuitable for short answers and a retrieval signal whose sign was found and corrected through measurement. The entire study was carried out on a single consumer laptop with only a few dollars of API spend. 

Index Terms —retrieval-augmented generation, adaptive re-trieval, confidence estimation, selective prediction, question an-swering, self-consistency, large language models 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) [1] has become the standard way to ground large language models (LLMs) in external knowledge. Instead of relying only on the facts a model memorised during training, a RAG system retrieves relevant passages from a corpus and gives them to the model as evidence before it answers. A typical pipeline retrieves a fixed number of passages for every query, attaches them to the prompt, and generates an answer. This works well in many cases, but it carries a hidden assumption that every question needs the same amount of evidence, and that assumption is usually wrong. A simple factoid question such as “Of which African country is Niamey the capital?” can be answered from a single passage. A multi-hop question such as “Which director links Film A and Actor B?” often needs several rounds of evidence gathering to connect the intermediate facts. When the retrieval depth is fixed, the system over-retrieves for easy questions, wasting computation, context-window space, and, on paid APIs, money. At the same time it under-retrieves for hard questions and leaves them without enough evidence to answer correctly. This paper introduces AB-RAG (Adaptive Budgeted Retrieval-Augmented Generation), a framework that makes retrieval depth adaptive and budgeted. Rather than retrieving a fixed number of passages, AB-RAG generates an answer, estimates how confident it is in that answer, and then decides whether to stop or to retrieve more evidence. It repeats this loop until the answer is confident enough or until a retrieval budget runs out. The guiding principle is that a system should retrieve as much evidence as a question actually needs, and no more. This yields three benefits at once: efficiency on easy queries by stopping early, robustness on hard queries by retrieving more when unsure, and a single tunable threshold that trades retrieval cost against accuracy. Fig. 1 contrasts the two regimes. An important property of AB-RAG is that it is training-free and backbone-agnostic. It needs no fine-tuning, no separate reward model, and no special tokens, so it can wrap around any existing generator. This sets it apart from earlier adaptive methods. Self-RAG [2], for example, trains a model to emit reflection tokens, and FLARE [3] relies on a single confidence signal with no explicit retrieval budget. AB-RAG instead works with any backbone, whether it is an open-weight model that exposes token-level probabilities or a closed commercial API that does not. For closed APIs it substitutes a self-consistency proxy in place of the missing probabilities. This matters because a large share of deployed QA systems today are built on top of proprietary APIs, and a method that only works when internal probabilities are available would not apply to them. The same backbone-agnostic stance guided 1

> arXiv:2606.29090v1 [cs.CL] 27 Jun 2026 Fig. 1. Fixed-depth RAG applies the same retrieval budget to every query, which over-retrieves for easy questions and under-retrieves for hard ones. AB-RAG estimates confidence after each answer and retrieves more only when needed, subject to a budget.

our earlier work on adaptive decision-making in multi-agent systems [4], where agents act on their own local signals rather than a centrally trained controller. 

A. Problem Statement and Objectives 

The problem this work addresses is the unreliable and inefficient use of retrieval in question answering. Fixed-depth RAG cannot match its retrieval effort to the difficulty of a query, and a standard pipeline gives no signal about when a generated answer can be trusted. The objectives of the project are as follows. 1) To design a training-free, confidence-driven adaptive retrieval framework that adjusts retrieval depth for each query under an explicit budget. 2) To build a multi-signal confidence estimator that com-bines the model’s internal certainty, the agreement be-tween the answer and the evidence, and the quality of the retrieval, without training any model. 3) To make the framework operate on both open-weight backbones, which provide real token log-probabilities, and closed APIs, which do not, using a self-consistency proxy in the closed case. 4) To find out empirically which confidence signals actually predict answer correctness, treating the proposed signals as hypotheses to be tested rather than assuming they all work. 5) To evaluate the framework carefully across different model scales and two datasets, and to report negative or nuanced findings as genuine results rather than hiding them. 

B. Contributions 

This work makes the following contributions.  

> •

A training-free, budgeted, multi-signal adaptive retrieval framework that operates on both open-weight and closed-API backbones, filling a gap left open by prior adaptive-RAG methods.  

> •

A confidence estimator that reliably separates correct from incorrect answers on every backbone tested, reach-ing a 57.6% versus 0% Exact Match split on a factoid dataset, which supports a strong selective-prediction use case.  

> •

An honest empirical study of the three proposed con-fidence signals, showing that only the model-certainty signal is strongly predictive, that an evidence-consistency signal is unsuitable for short-answer QA for a clear mech-anistic reason, and that a retrieval-variance signal had its sign backwards and was corrected through measurement.  

> •

A demonstration that the whole approach is reproducible on a single consumer laptop with a 4 GB GPU and only a few dollars of API spend. 

C. Organisation of the Paper 

The rest of the paper is organised as follows. Section II reviews the background and related work, placing AB-RAG against standard, trained, and training-free adaptive RAG. Section III presents the methodology: the system architecture, the retrieval stack with its governing equations, the three-signal confidence estimator, and the adaptive budgeted loop as a formal algorithm. Section IV describes the implemen-tation, including the development environment, the datasets, the model backbones, and an analysis of API cost. Section V reports all experimental results, covering retrieval quality, the static-versus-adaptive comparison across three backbones, the confidence-correctness analysis, the cost-accuracy tradeoff, 2and the signal ablation and diagnostics. Section VI concludes and sets out directions for future work. II. B ACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK 

A. Conceptual Background 

This section explains the concepts AB-RAG builds on, so the rest of the paper can be read without assuming prior fa-miliarity with retrieval systems or language-model confidence. 

Retrieval-Augmented Generation. A language model trained on a fixed corpus can only answer from what it memorised, and it has no way to cite a source or stay current. RAG addresses this by adding a retrieval step in front of generation. When a question arrives, a retriever searches a corpus for passages likely to contain the answer, and those passages are placed in the model’s prompt as evidence. The model then answers using the evidence rather than its memory alone, which reduces hallucination and lets the system work over knowledge it was never trained on [5], [6]. 

Sparse and dense retrieval. There are two main families of retriever. Sparse retrieval, represented here by BM25, matches the literal words of the query against the words of each passage and scores passages by term overlap, weighted so that rare words count for more and very long passages are not unfairly favoured. It is fast and strong when the answer shares vocabulary with the question, but it misses passages that express the same idea in different words. Dense retrieval instead encodes the query and each passage into vectors using a neural embedding model and measures similarity by the closeness of those vectors. Because the vectors capture meaning rather than exact words, dense retrieval can match paraphrases, but it depends heavily on the quality of the embedding model. A common strategy is to combine the two so that the lexical precision of BM25 and the semantic recall of dense retrieval reinforce each other. 

Reranking. Retrievers like BM25 and dense search score each passage independently of the others and are tuned for speed over a large corpus, so their ordering is only approxi-mate. A reranker improves the ordering of a small candidate set. A cross-encoder reranker takes the query and a single passage together as one input and outputs a relevance score, which lets it model fine-grained interactions that a fast retriever cannot. It is too slow to run over a whole corpus, so it is applied only to the top candidates the retriever returns. 

Confidence and selective prediction. A model can produce an answer, but on its own it does not tell us whether that answer is trustworthy. Confidence estimation tries to attach a number to an answer that reflects how likely it is to be correct [7], [8]. If that number is reliable, it enables selective prediction, where the system answers when confident and abstains or gathers more information when not. AB-RAG uses confidence in exactly this way, as the signal that decides whether to stop or to retrieve more. 

B. Related Work Standard RAG. The retrieve-then-generate pattern was es-tablished by early RAG work [1] and by Dense Passage Retrieval (DPR) [9], which showed that learned dense re-trievers could outperform traditional sparse methods on open-domain question answering. These systems use a fixed re-trieval depth and do not adapt to the query. Later work such as REALM [10], RETRO [11], and Fusion-in-Decoder [12] scaled or restructured the retrieve-then-read pipeline but kept retrieval essentially static with respect to per-query difficulty. In-context retrieval [13], nearest-neighbour language mod-els [14], tool-using models [15], [16], and compositional retrieve-and-reason programs [17], [18] extend the paradigm in other directions, and standard retrieval benchmarks such as BEIR [19], Natural Questions [20], and ExpertQA [21] support their evaluation. Language models are also known to encode substantial factual knowledge directly in their parameters [22], and structured-output settings benefit from retrieval grounding as well [23]. Retrieval has been combined with few-shot learning at scale [24] and with explicit reasoning chains [25] and reasoning-acting loops [26], while recent work has also focused on systematically evaluating RAG systems [27], [28]. 

Self-RAG. Self-RAG [2] makes generation adaptive by train-ing a model to emit special reflection tokens that decide when to retrieve and that critique the retrieved evidence and the generated answer. It is a strong method, but it requires training the model with a specially constructed dataset, which makes it costly to apply and impossible to use directly with a closed API whose weights cannot be modified. 

FLARE. Forward-Looking Active Retrieval (FLARE) [3] decides when to retrieve during long-form generation by watching the model’s token probabilities and retrieving more when an upcoming sentence looks uncertain. It is training-free, which AB-RAG shares, but it relies on a single signal, token probability, and it sets no explicit retrieval budget, so it cannot bound the cost of answering a query. Related iterative approaches interleave retrieval with reasoning [29] or repeat-edly refine the query [30], but likewise without an explicit budget. A concurrent line of work makes retrieval adaptive by routing queries according to predicted complexity [31] or by detecting low-confidence spans during generation and validating them [32], which is close in spirit to AB-RAG but either requires a trained router or targets long-form generation rather than budgeted short-answer QA. 

Retrieval components. The retrieval stack in this work uses established building blocks. BM25 [33], [34] is the standard sparse ranking function. BGE [35] is a strong open-weight text embedding model used for dense retrieval. Reciprocal Rank Fusion (RRF) [36] is a simple and robust way to combine the rankings of different retrievers without tuning. Cross-encoder rerankers [37] trained on the MS MARCO passage ranking data [38] are widely used to refine candidate ordering, and ColBERT [39] is a related late-interaction approach. 

Confidence without training. For models that expose token probabilities, the average probability of the generated tokens is a natural confidence signal [8], [40]. For models that do not, self-consistency [41] offers an alternative: the model is sampled several times and the agreement among the samples is used as a proxy for confidence, on the reasoning that a 3model which keeps giving the same answer is more likely to be right. Calibration studies [7], [42] and analyses of when models know what they know [8], [43] motivate treating such signals as hypotheses to be measured rather than trusted by default. AB-RAG uses the self-consistency idea to extend confidence estimation to closed APIs. Other approaches ask the model to verbalise its own uncertainty [44], [45] or estimate semantic uncertainty over sampled generations [46]; these are complementary to the self-consistency proxy used here. 

C. Outcome of the Review 

The review shows a clear gap. Standard RAG is training-free and works on any backbone but is not adaptive. Self-RAG is adaptive but needs training and therefore cannot be applied to closed APIs. FLARE is training-free and adaptive but uses a single signal and sets no budget. No existing method combines all of the properties that a practical, reliable QA system would want at the same time: a training-free design, an explicit retrieval budget, a confidence estimate built from more than one signal, and operation on both open and closed backbones. AB-RAG is designed to fill exactly this gap, and Table I summarises the comparison. 

D. Technologies Used 

The implementation uses Python as the primary language. PyTorch [47] provides the deep-learning runtime and the Hugging Face libraries [48] supply the language and em-bedding models. FAISS [49] indexes the dense vectors and searches them efficiently. The rank_bm25 library provides the sparse retriever, and the sentence-transformers library [50] provides both the BGE embedding model and the cross-encoder reranker. Open-weight models run locally through Hugging Face Transformers and through Ollama, while the closed model is accessed through a commercial API. All experiments run on a single consumer laptop GPU. III. M ETHODOLOGY AND FRAMEWORK 

A. Overall Framework 

The aim of AB-RAG is to answer a question using only as much retrieval as that question needs, and to do so without training any model. The framework has three moving parts that work together. First, a retrieval stack finds and orders candidate evidence for a question. Second, a generator produces an an-swer from the current evidence. Third, a confidence estimator scores how trustworthy that answer is, and a control loop uses the score to decide whether to stop or to retrieve more. The loop is bounded by a budget, so the system can never spend more than a fixed number of retrieval rounds on any single question. 

B. System Architecture 

Fig. 2 shows the complete pipeline. A question enters the hybrid retrieval stage, where a sparse retriever and a dense retriever each rank the corpus and their rankings are fused. A cross-encoder then reranks the fused candidates so that the most relevant passages rise to the top. The top passages become the evidence set, which is passed to the generator together with the question. The generator returns an answer and a first confidence signal. The confidence estimator combines that signal with two further signals computed from the evidence and the retrieval scores, and produces a single confidence value. A decision step compares this value against a threshold. If the answer is confident enough the loop stops and returns it; if not, and if the budget has not been spent, the system enlarges the evidence set and repeats the generate-and-score step. If the budget is exhausted the loop stops and returns the best answer it has. A key design choice is that the same architecture works for any generator. The only part that depends on the backbone is the first confidence signal, which is read directly from token probabilities when the model exposes them and is otherwise estimated by sampling. Everything else, including the retrieval stack, the other two signals, and the control loop, is identical across backbones. 

C. Retrieval Stack 

The retrieval stack combines a sparse retriever, a dense retriever, a fusion step, and a reranker. 

Sparse retrieval with BM25. BM25 [33] scores a passage against a query by summing a weight for each query term that appears in the passage. The weight rewards terms that are rare across the corpus and discounts terms that appear very often within a single passage, with a correction for passage length. For a query q and passage d, the score is BM25 (q, d ) = X

> t∈q

IDF (t) · f (t, d ) ( k1 + 1) 

f (t, d ) + k1



1 − b + b |d|

avgdl 



(1) where f (t, d ) is the frequency of term t in passage d, |d| is the passage length, avgdl is the average passage length, IDF (t)

is the inverse document frequency of t, and k1 and b control term-frequency saturation and length normalisation. We use the standard values k1 = 1 .5 and b = 0 .75 .

Dense retrieval. The dense retriever encodes the query and each passage into unit-length vectors with the BGE embedding model [35] and scores a passage by the cosine similarity between its vector and the query vector. Because the vectors are normalised, the cosine similarity is the dot product, sim (q, d ) = e(q) · e(d) (2) where e(q) and e(d) are the embeddings of the query and passage. The vectors are indexed with FAISS [49] so the most similar passages can be found quickly even over a large corpus. 

Fusion with Reciprocal Rank Fusion. The sparse and dense rankings are combined using Reciprocal Rank Fusion [36], which only needs the rank of each passage in each list and not the raw scores, so it does not require the two retrievers to be on the same scale. A passage at rank r in a list contributes a score 4TABLE I POSITIONING OF AB-RAG A GAINST RELATED RAG M ETHODS                      

> Method Training-free Budgeted Multi-signal confidence Works on closed APIs
> Standard RAG [1] Yes No No Yes Self-RAG [2] No No Reflection tokens No FLARE [3] Yes No Single signal Partial
> AB-RAG (ours) Yes Yes Three signals Yes
> Fig. 2. The AB-RAG architecture. Hybrid retrieval and reranking produce an evidence set; the generator answers; the confidence estimator combines three signals; and the decision step either stops or triggers another retrieval round, subject to the budget.

of one over a constant plus that rank, and the contributions from the two lists are added, RRF (d) = X

> i

1

k + rank i(d) (3) where the sum runs over the retrievers, rank i(d) is the rank of passage d in retriever i, and k is a smoothing constant set to the standard value of 60. Passages are then ordered by their fused score. 

Reranking. The fused candidate list is reranked by a cross-encoder [37], which scores each question–passage pair jointly. The cross-encoder is more accurate than the retrievers but slower, so it is applied only to the candidate pool rather than the whole corpus. The reranked order defines the final evidence ranking, and the top passages from it form the evidence set given to the generator. 

D. The Confidence Estimator 

The confidence estimator is the core contribution of this work. After the generator produces an answer, the estimator combines three signals into a single confidence value, Conf = clip (αS 1 + βS 2 + γS 3, 0, 1) (4) where S1, S2, and S3 are the three signals described below and α, β, γ are weights. The value is clipped to [0 , 1] so it can be read as a confidence. The three signals capture three different and complementary notions of trust: how sure the model is, how well the answer agrees with the evidence, and how cleanly the retrieval separated relevant from irrelevant passages. Fig. 3 illustrates what each signal measures. 

Signal 1: token probability or self-consistency. The first signal measures the model’s own certainty. For an open-weight model that exposes token probabilities, it is the mean probability of the generated answer tokens, 

S1 = 1

N

> N

X

> i=1

p(token i) (5) where p(token i) is the probability the model assigned to the 

i-th generated token and N is the number of tokens. A model that is internally certain assigns high probability to each token it emits, giving a high signal. For a closed API that does not expose token probabilities, the same notion is estimated by self-consistency [41]: the model is sampled k times at a non-zero temperature, and the signal is the fraction of samples that agree with the most common answer, 

S1 = count of modal answer 

k . (6) 5Fig. 3. The three confidence signals. S1 is the model’s own certainty from token probabilities or self-consistency; S2 is the embedding similarity between the answer and the evidence; S3 is the variance of the reranker scores, used as a reward for clean separation. 

A model that keeps returning the same answer across samples is treated as more confident. This substitution is what allows AB-RAG to run on closed APIs without any access to their internals. 

Signal 2: evidence–answer consistency. The second signal measures whether the answer is grounded in the retrieved evidence. It is the cosine similarity between the embedding of the answer and the embedding of the evidence, mapped to 

[0 , 1] ,

S2 = cos( e(a), e (E)) + 1 2 (7) A high value means the answer is semantically close to the ev-idence, which is intended to indicate grounding. As Section V shows, this signal turns out not to predict correctness for short-answer question answering, and the reason is examined there. 

Signal 3: retrieval-score variance as a reward. The third signal is computed from the reranker scores of the evidence passages. It is the variance of those scores, normalised to [0 , 1] ,

S3 = Var (normalised rerank scores ) (8) The interpretation deserves care. A high variance means the reranker assigned clearly different scores to different passages, which indicates that it separated relevant passages from irrel-evant ones with confidence. A low variance means the scores are bunched together, which indicates that the reranker could not tell the passages apart. High variance is therefore a sign of good retrieval, so the signal is added as a reward rather than subtracted as a penalty. The sign of this signal was corrected during the diagnostics in Section V, where the original penalty formulation was found to be backwards. The final weights are α = 0 .7, β = 0 .05 , and γ = 0 .25 .These give most of the weight to the model’s own certainty, a small weight to evidence consistency, and a moderate weight to the retrieval-variance reward. The justification for these values, including why the evidence-consistency weight is kept 

Algorithm 1 AB-RAG — Adaptive Budgeted Retrieval 

Require: question q, corpus C, threshold τ , budget Tmax ,start size K0, step kstep  

> 1:

t ← 1; K ← K0; best ← ∅ 

> 2:

while true do  

> 3:

E ← RERANK (RETRIEVE (q, C ))[1: K] 

> 4:

(a, S 1) ← GENERATE (q, E ) 

> 5:

S2 ← EVIDENCE CONSISTENCY (a, E ) 

> 6:

S3 ← VAR (RERANK SCORES (E))  

> 7:

conf ← clip (αS 1 + βS 2 + γS 3, 0, 1)  

> 8:

best ← a 

> 9:

if conf ≥ τ then return a ▷ confident: stop early  

> 10:

end if  

> 11:

if t ≥ Tmax then return best ▷ budget spent: stop  

> 12:

end if  

> 13:

t ← t + 1 ; K ← K + kstep ▷ retrieve more  

> 14:

end while 

near zero, comes from the signal ablation in Section V, where the signals were treated as hypotheses and tested rather than assumed to be useful. 

E. The Adaptive Budgeted Loop 

The control loop ties the pieces together. It begins with a small evidence set and generates an answer, then computes the confidence. If the confidence reaches the threshold the loop returns the answer immediately. If not, and if the budget of retrieval rounds has not been spent, the loop enlarges the evidence set by a fixed step and repeats. If the budget is spent the loop returns the best answer it has produced. Algorithm 1 states this precisely. The loop has three parameters: the confidence threshold τ ,which sets how sure the system must be before it stops; the budget Tmax , which caps the number of retrieval rounds; and the step kstep , which sets how many extra passages are added 6Fig. 4. A real worked example of the adaptive loop. The first round is below the threshold and triggers more retrieval; the second round crosses the threshold and the loop stops with the correct answer. The confidence values are taken from the actual run. 

each round. Their default values are τ = 0 .6, Tmax = 3 ,and kstep = 5 , with the evidence set starting at five passages. Raising τ makes the system more cautious, so it retrieves more often and spends more, while lowering τ makes it stop sooner and spend less. This single threshold is the knob that trades cost against accuracy, and Section V shows the resulting tradeoff curve. Fig. 4 shows the loop on a real question from the experi-ments. In the first round the model answers from five passages but is not confident, so the loop retrieves more. In the second round, with ten passages, the answer settles to the correct form and the confidence rises above the threshold, so the loop stops. This is the adaptive behaviour in miniature, using the actual confidence values recorded during the run. 

F. Evaluation Metrics 

The framework is evaluated with four measures. Exact Match (EM) is the fraction of answers that exactly match the gold answer after a normalisation that lowercases the text, removes punctuation, and drops articles, EM = number of exact matches total questions (9) Token-level F1 gives partial credit by measuring the overlap of words between the predicted and gold answers, as the harmonic mean of precision and recall over shared tokens, F1 = 2 · precision · recall precision + recall (10) The Area Under the Receiver Operating Characteristic curve (AUROC) measures how well the confidence value separates correct from incorrect answers. It can be read as the probability that a randomly chosen correct answer receives a higher confidence than a randomly chosen incorrect one, AUROC = P (Conf correct > Conf incorrect ) (11) An AUROC of one means the confidence perfectly ranks correct above incorrect answers, while an AUROC of one half means the confidence is no better than chance. The                                   

> TABLE II HYPERPARAMETERS USED ACROSS THE AB-RAG P IPELINE
> Component Parameter Value
> Embedding model encoder bge-large-en-v1.5 Reranker cross-encoder ms-marco-MiniLM-L12 BM25 k1,b1.5, 0.75 Sparse/dense depth bm25 topk, dense topk 20, 20 Rank fusion RRF k60 Reranking rerank topk 5Confidence weights α,β,γ0.7, 0.05, 0.25 Adaptive policy τ,Tmax ,kstep 0.6, 3, 5 Generation max new tokens 64 Self-consistency samples k3Reproducibility seed 42

fourth measure is the average number of retrieval iterations per query, which captures the cost side of the cost-accuracy tradeoff. Table II lists all hyperparameters so the configuration is reproducible. IV. I MPLEMENTATION 

A. Development Environment 

All experiments were carried out on a single consumer laptop with an NVIDIA RTX 3050 Laptop GPU with 4 GB of video memory. The software environment used Python 3.11 inside a Conda environment, with PyTorch built against CUDA 12.1. The retrieval and reranking models, the local generator, and the embedding model all run on this one GPU, and the closed model is reached over the network through a commercial API. Keeping the whole project on a single modest machine was a deliberate constraint, because it shows that the method does not depend on large compute and can be reproduced by a student or a small team. This constraint also shaped one important design decision about the retrieval corpus. The most thorough way to evaluate open-domain retrieval would be to index the full Wikipedia passage collection used by Dense Passage Retrieval [9], which contains around twenty-one million passages. Indexing a corpus of that size is not feasible on a 4 GB laptop GPU and would take days. Instead, this work uses a pooled-corpus open-retrieval setting, described below, which keeps the retrieval task genuinely difficult while remaining tractable on the available hardware. This choice is stated openly rather than hidden, because being honest about the scope of the evaluation is part of the integrity of the work, and the pooled-corpus setting is itself a recognised and citable way to study retrieval under controlled conditions. 

B. Datasets 

Two question answering datasets were used, chosen so the framework could be tested on two different kinds of question. HotpotQA [51] is a multi-hop dataset, where answering a question requires combining facts from more than one passage. It is used in two settings. In the distractor setting, each question comes with about ten candidate passages, two of which are 7TABLE III DATASETS AND EVALUATION SETTINGS                 

> Dataset Setting Questions Corpus Answer type
> HotpotQA distractor 500 ∼10/q multi-hop HotpotQA open (pooled) 500 4,963 multi-hop TriviaQA open (pooled) 200 2,582 factoid

the gold supporting passages, and the task is to find the two correct passages among the ten. This setting is easy and saturates quickly, which made it useful mainly as a first check of the retrieval code. In the open setting, the passages from many questions are pooled into one shared corpus of several thousand passages, and each question must find its two gold passages among the whole pool. This open setting is the main one used here, because it keeps recall meaningful at every retrieval depth and lets reranking show a real effect. TriviaQA [52] is a factoid dataset, where each question has a short answer that can usually be found in a single passage. It is used in the open setting with its own pooled corpus. TriviaQA was added as a second dataset to test whether the findings from HotpotQA carry over to a different style of question. Table III summarises the datasets and their settings. 

C. Pipeline Modules 

The system is organised as a sequence of numbered scripts, each producing an output that the next stage can reuse without recomputation. This structure was chosen so that expensive steps, such as generating answers from a model, are run once and saved, and later analysis reads the saved results rather than calling the model again. The adaptive loop saves the full per-iteration trace for every question, recording the answer, the confidence, and the three signal values at each step. Because these traces are saved, the later experiment, ablation, and diagnostic scripts can replay the loop under different settings without ever calling a model again, which makes the analysis both fast and free to repeat. The confidence signals are implemented as small, self-contained functions. The following extract shows the token-probability and retrieval-variance signals as they appear in the code. The generation module is where the difference between open and closed backbones is handled. For the local open-weight model, the code reads the real per-token log-probabilities the model returns. For the closed model and the Ollama-hosted model, which do not return token probabilities, the code instead samples the model several times and measures how often the samples agree, using that agreement as the Signal 1 proxy. 

D. Model Backbones 

Three generators were used so the framework could be tested across a range of model sizes and both open and closed access. The first is Qwen2.5-1.5B-Instruct [53], a small open-weight model that runs locally and returns real token probabilities. It                                         

> def token_probability_confidence(token_logprobs): if not token_logprobs: return 0.0 probs =np.exp(np.array(token_logprobs)) return float(np.clip(probs.mean(), 0, 1)) def retrieval_score_variance(rerank_scores): s=np.array(rerank_scores, dtype=np.float64) if s.size <= 1: return 0.0 lo, hi =s.min(), s.max() if hi -lo <1e-9: return 0.0 s_norm =(s -lo) /(hi -lo) return float(np.clip(s_norm.var(), 0, 1))
> Fig. 5. The token-probability and retrieval-variance confidence signals as implemented. The variance signal normalises the reranker scores before measuring their spread.

fits within the 4 GB of GPU memory in half precision and represents the low end of the capability range. The second is Llama-3.2-3B [54], a mid-sized open-weight model accessed through Ollama, which does not expose token probabilities, so it uses the self-consistency proxy. The third is Claude Haiku [55], a closed commercial model accessed through a hosted API, which also does not expose token probabilities and so also uses self-consistency. Using these three together is what makes the cross-backbone analysis in Section V possible: the small local model shows what happens at low capability, the mid model shows the open-weight middle of the range, and the closed API model shows the practical case that motivated the self-consistency design in the first place. 

E. API Cost and Token Analysis 

Because one backbone is a paid API, the cost of running AB-RAG on it is worth examining, both as a practical matter and because it interacts with the design. The self-consistency proxy requires sampling the model several times for each answer, with three samples used here, so each generated answer costs three API calls rather than one. This is the price of estimating confidence without access to token probabilities. At the time of the experiments, the closed model was priced at one dollar per million input tokens and five dollars per million output tokens. A static run over two hundred questions, which generates one answer per question with three samples each, makes about six hundred API calls. Each call sends the question and the evidence passages and receives a short an-swer, so the input dominates the cost. The adaptive runs make more calls because some questions trigger additional retrieval rounds, but the budget caps how far this can grow. Table IV sets out the estimated cost of each Claude experiment. Two points stand out. First, the whole study, across all three backbones and two datasets, was completed on a single laptop with only a few dollars of API spend, which supports the claim that the method is reproducible on a modest budget. Second, the budget in the adaptive loop is not only an accuracy control but also a direct cost control, because it bounds the number of API calls a single question can ever cause. This makes AB-RAG attractive in settings where each model call has a real monetary cost. 8TABLE IV ESTIMATED API C OST OF THE CLAUDE HAIKU EXPERIMENTS                                                         

> Experiment API calls Tokens (in/out) Est. cost
> HotpotQA static (K=10) 600 ∼1,340 / 20 ∼$0.86 TriviaQA static (K=10) 600 ∼1,340 / 20 ∼$0.86 HotpotQA adaptive ∼816 ∼1,080 / 20 ∼$0.96 TriviaQA adaptive ∼1,086 ∼1,210 / 20 ∼$1.42 Priced at $1 per million input tokens and $5 per million output tokens, with three self-consistency samples per answer. TABLE V RETRIEVAL RECALL (%) IN THE OPEN SETTING
> Method @5 @10 @20 @50
> HotpotQA (n=500, corpus 4,963)
> BM25 58.7 72.8 80.9 86.2 Dense 89.2 95.3 97.2 98.3 Hybrid 79.8 93.3 96.9 97.6 Reranked 86.6 94.0 97.3 97.6
> TriviaQA (n=200, corpus 2,582)
> BM25 43.6 54.1 63.7 69.6 Dense 66.9 80.6 89.1 95.3 Hybrid 59.4 75.8 86.2 90.8 Reranked 67.0 80.3 88.4 90.8

V. R ESULTS AND ANALYSIS 

A. Retrieval Results 

The first set of experiments measures how well the retrieval stack finds the gold passages, because the quality of the evidence sets an upper bound on how well the generator can answer. Recall at k, the fraction of gold passages found within the top k retrieved passages, is reported for the sparse retriever (BM25), the dense retriever, their hybrid fusion, and the reranked hybrid. 

Distractor setting. The first measurements were taken in the HotpotQA distractor setting, where each question has only about ten candidate passages. Recall reaches one hundred percent at k = 10 and 20 , which is expected because there are only about ten passages per question, so retrieving ten of them finds everything. Only recall at five separates the methods, where the dense retriever leads (92.9%), followed by the hybrid (88.2%) and then BM25 (73.6%). This saturation is why the distractor setting was used only as an early check: when almost every passage is retrieved regardless of method, the numbers cannot show whether one retriever is genuinely better, and adding the cross-encoder leaves recall almost unchanged (87.5% versus 88.2% at five) because there is nothing for the reranker to fix. 

Open setting. Moving to the open setting, where each ques-tion must find its gold passages among several thousand pooled passages, makes the task genuinely hard and the numbers informative. Table V shows recall on both open corpora, and Fig. 6 plots them side by side. Three findings come out of the open-setting results, and they hold on both datasets. First, recall no longer saturates, so the numbers are meaningful at every depth, which confirms that the open setting is the right one for studying retrieval. Second, the dense retriever is the single strongest method on this clean encyclopaedic text. This is worth stating plainly because it runs against the common expectation that hybrid retrieval always wins. The explanation is that when the dense retriever is already strong and the text is clean, fusing in the lexical matches from BM25 pulls in passages that share words with the query but are not actually relevant, which slightly lowers precision at the top of the ranking. Hybrid retrieval helps more when the dense retriever is weak or the text is noisy, neither of which is the case here. This is reported as an honest nuance rather than smoothed over, because it reflects what the data actually shows. Third, reranking helps in the open setting, lifting hybrid recall at five from 79.8 to 86.6 on HotpotQA, the opposite of what happened in the saturated distractor setting, which confirms that the cross-encoder earns its place when there are real candidates to reorder. 

B. Static RAG versus AB-RAG Across Backbones 

The central experiments compare static RAG, which uses a fixed retrieval depth and a single pass, against AB-RAG, which adapts the retrieval depth per query. The comparison was run on three backbones of increasing capability, and on both datasets for the closed model. Table VI reports Exact Match, token-level F1, the average number of retrieval iterations, and the AUROC of confidence against correctness, with bootstrap confidence intervals on the AB-RAG Exact Match. Fig. 7 shows the Exact Match results. The results show a clear pattern that depends on the ca-pability of the backbone. With the small Qwen-1.5B model, AB-RAG and static RAG tie on Exact Match, and the average number of iterations barely rises above one, which means the loop almost always stops after the first round. A small model rarely improves its answer when given more evidence, so the adaptive policy has little to work with. This is reported as an honest null result, not hidden, because it marks the lower edge of where the method helps. With the mid-sized Llama-3.2-3B model, AB-RAG im-proves Exact Match over static from 39.5 to 45.0, and the average number of iterations rises to 1.90, showing that the loop is genuinely engaging the adaptive behaviour. With the closed Claude Haiku model on HotpotQA the two methods are close on Exact Match, but on TriviaQA AB-RAG improves Exact Match over static from 35.5 to 40.0. The TriviaQA result is notable because it shows the accuracy gain that the multi-hop HotpotQA setting did not produce for this model. Factoid questions, which often have a single findable answer, benefit more from the strategy of retrieving more when unsure than multi-hop questions do here. One number in Table VI needs care to interpret. The Llama model’s Exact Match of 45.0 is higher than the Claude model’s 33.0 on HotpotQA, but this should not be read as Llama being a better question answering model than Claude. Exact Match requires the predicted answer to match the gold answer as an exact string after normalisation, and Claude tends to give slightly more verbose answers, such as “Wichita, Kansas” 9Fig. 6. Open-retrieval recall by method on HotpotQA and TriviaQA. The dense retriever is strongest on both datasets, hybrid fusion sits below it on this clean text, and reranking lifts the hard low-k recall. TABLE VI STATIC RAG VERSUS AB-RAG A CROSS BACKBONES 

Backbone / Dataset Static EM AB-RAG EM Static F1 AB-RAG F1 Avg. iter. AUROC 

Qwen-1.5B / HotpotQA 34.5 34.5 47.3 46.2 1.09 0.600 Llama-3.2-3B / HotpotQA 39.5 45.0 56.3 58.3 1.90 0.644 Claude Haiku / HotpotQA 32.5 33.0 51.5 50.7 1.36 0.682 Claude Haiku / TriviaQA 35.5 40.0 50.8 53.5 1.81 0.733 EM and F1 are percentages; Avg. iter. is the average retrieval iterations; AUROC is for confidence against correctness. Bootstrap 95% CIs on AB-RAG EM: Qwen 28.5–41.0, Llama 38.5–52.0, Claude/HotpotQA 26.5–39.5, Claude/TriviaQA 33.5–47.0. 

Fig. 7. Exact Match for static RAG and AB-RAG across backbones, with 95% bootstrap confidence intervals on the AB-RAG values. AB-RAG improves over static most clearly on the mid-sized model and on the closed model with TriviaQA. 

when the gold answer is simply “Wichita”. These answers are correct in substance but are marked wrong by Exact Match. The token-level F1 scores, which give partial credit, narrow the gap, and a set of qualitative examples in Section V shows this effect directly. The honest reading is that AB-RAG behaves consistently across backbones, and that Exact Match alone understates the closed model because of answer formatting. 10 TABLE VII EXACT MATCH OF HIGH - VERSUS LOW -C ONFIDENCE ANSWERS                                 

> (τ= 0 .6)
> Backbone / Dataset High-conf. EM (n) Low-conf. EM (n)
> Qwen-1.5B / HotpotQA 34.7% (199) 0.0% (1) Llama-3.2-3B / HotpotQA 51.6% (155) 22.2% (45) Claude Haiku / HotpotQA 36.5% (181) 0.0% (19) Claude Haiku / TriviaQA 57.6% (139) 0.0% (61) TABLE VIII CONFIDENCE -T HRESHOLD SWEEP : A VG . I TERATIONS / E XACT MATCH
> τClaude HotpotQA Claude TriviaQA Qwen HotpotQA
> 0.30 1.00 / 32.5 1.00 / 35.5 1.00 / 34.5 0.45 1.14 / 32.5 1.30 / 37.0 1.02 / 34.5 0.60 1.36 / 33.0 1.81 / 40.0 1.09 / 34.5 0.75 1.98 / 34.5 2.42 / 40.0 1.18 / 34.0 0.90 2.61 / 35.5 2.88 / 40.0 1.27 / 33.5

C. Confidence Predicts Correctness 

The most important claim of this work is that the confidence value produced by the estimator actually predicts whether an answer is correct. If it does, then the confidence can be trusted to decide when to stop retrieving and when to abstain. This was tested by splitting the answers into a high-confidence group and a low-confidence group at the threshold, and measuring the Exact Match of each group. Table VII shows the result across all backbones and datasets, and Fig. 8 plots it. The separation is clear and it holds on every backbone. On the closed model with TriviaQA, the high-confidence answers reach 57.6% Exact Match while the low-confidence answers reach zero, and the low-confidence group is large at sixty-one questions, so this is not a small-sample artefact. On the closed model with HotpotQA the split is 36.5% against zero, and on the mid-sized Llama model it is 51.6% against 22.2%. The only weak case is the small Qwen model, where almost every answer landed in the high-confidence group and only a single question fell into the low-confidence group, which is too few to read anything into. Setting that one aside, the finding is consistent: when the estimator reports high confidence the answer is usually right, and when it reports low confidence the answer is usually wrong. This is the result that makes AB-RAG useful for selective prediction, because a system can answer when confident and abstain or retrieve more when not. 

D. The Cost-Accuracy Tradeoff 

The adaptive loop exposes a single knob, the confidence threshold, that trades retrieval cost against accuracy. Raising the threshold makes the system require more confidence before it stops, so it retrieves more often and spends more, while lowering it makes the system stop sooner and spend less. Fig. 9 shows what happens to Exact Match and to the average number of retrieval iterations as the threshold is swept, for each backbone. Table VIII gives the underlying numbers. The shape of the curve depends on the backbone, and this is itself a finding. For the closed model on HotpotQA, raising                  

> TABLE IX SINGLE -S IGNAL AUROC A GAINST CORRECTNESS
> Backbone / Dataset S1S2S3
> Qwen-1.5B / HotpotQA 0.607 0.517 0.429 Llama-3.2-3B / HotpotQA 0.651 0.568 0.550 Claude Haiku / HotpotQA 0.769 0.353 0.572 Claude Haiku / TriviaQA 0.776 0.374 0.594

the threshold raises both the average number of iterations and the Exact Match, producing the smooth cost-accuracy tradeoff the method promises. For the closed model on TriviaQA, the Exact Match holds at its ceiling while the cost rises with the threshold, which shows that the accuracy ceiling on that benchmark is set by the backbone and the retrieval rather than by the policy, and that the policy’s value there is the quality of its confidence rather than a further lift in accuracy. For the small Qwen model the curve is flat or slightly declining, confirming that a model must be capable enough for the adaptive policy to give a real tradeoff. Taken together, the curves show that AB-RAG gives a usable cost knob on capable backbones, and that the benefit requires a backbone strong enough to make use of additional evidence. 

E. Signal Ablation and Diagnostics 

The confidence estimator combines three signals, and a fair question is whether all three actually help. Rather than assume they do, each signal was treated as a hypothesis and tested on its own. The measure used is the AUROC of that single signal against answer correctness, which says how well the signal alone separates correct from incorrect answers. Table IX reports the single-signal AUROC for all three signals on every backbone and dataset, and Fig. 10 plots it. 

Signal 1 is the workhorse. The model-certainty signal is strongly and consistently predictive. Its AUROC rises with the capability of the backbone, from 0.607 on the small Qwen model to 0.769 and 0.776 on the closed model. This is the clearest single result of the ablation: the better the model, the more its own certainty tells us about whether it is right. This is why the final weights give Signal 1 the largest share at 

α = 0 .7, and it is also why the self-consistency proxy matters so much, because it is what carries this signal over to closed models that do not expose token probabilities. 

Signal 2 fails for short answers, and the reason is mech-anistic. The evidence-consistency signal does not work for this task. Its AUROC sits around or below one half on the closed model, at 0.353 and 0.374, which means it is no better than chance and on these datasets slightly worse. This is a genuine negative result and it is reported as one. The reason is mechanistic rather than accidental. The signal measures the cosine similarity between the embedding of the answer and the embedding of the evidence passage, but the answers in these datasets are very short, often a single name or a few words, while the passages are long. Embedding a two-word answer and a hundred-word passage into the same space and comparing them does not produce a meaningful grounding 11 Fig. 8. High-confidence answers achieve far higher Exact Match than low-confidence answers on every backbone and dataset. The closed model on TriviaQA shows the cleanest separation, 57.6% against zero, with a large low-confidence group.  

> Fig. 9. Cost-accuracy tradeoff as the confidence threshold is swept. The closed model on HotpotQA shows a rising curve, the closed model on TriviaQA holds accuracy while cost rises, and the small Qwen model stays flat.

score, because the two texts differ so much in length and specificity that the cosine similarity is dominated by that mismatch rather than by whether the answer is supported. Several alternative formulations were tried, and Table X shows that none of them rescued the signal. Because no formulation of the evidence-consistency signal reached a useful level, it is kept in the estimator at a near-zero weight of β = 0 .05 rather than dropped entirely. Keeping it at a small weight does no harm and leaves the door open for tasks with longer answers, where an answer-evidence similarity might carry more information. Reporting this failure openly is more useful than quietly removing the signal, because it tells anyone building a similar system that answer-evidence cosine similarity is the wrong tool for short-answer grounding, and why. 

Signal 3 had its sign backwards. The retrieval-variance               

> TABLE X ALTERNATIVE FORMULATIONS OF S2AND S3(C LAUDE , H OTPOT QA,
> N=200)
> Signal variant AUROC
> S2: answer vs. mean-evidence 0.347
> S2: answer vs. best passage 0.398
> S2: answer vs. top-1 passage 0.313
> S3:−variance (penalty) 0.427
> S3:+variance (reward) 0.573
> S3: mean rerank score 0.547

signal produced the most instructive diagnostic of the project. In the first implementation, the variance of the reranker scores was subtracted as a penalty, on the intuition that spread-out scores meant the retriever was unsure. Measured on its own, 12 Fig. 10. Single-signal predictiveness across backbones. S1, the model-certainty signal, is strongly predictive everywhere; S2, evidence consistency, is at or below chance for these short answers; S3, the corrected retrieval-variance reward, is weakly predictive. 

this penalty formulation gave an AUROC of 0.427, which is below chance, a strong hint that the signal was pointing the wrong way. Inverting it, so that high variance is added as a reward, raised the AUROC to 0.573, which is above chance. The corrected interpretation is the right one: when the reranker assigns clearly different scores to different passages, it has separated the relevant passages from the irrelevant ones with confidence, and that clean separation is a sign of good retrieval. A flat, low-variance score profile means the reranker could not tell the passages apart. This sign error was found only because each signal was measured on its own rather than trusted, and correcting it is a small but real example of measurement improving a design. The final estimator uses the reward form with γ = 0 .25 .

F. Qualitative Examples and Discussion 

Numbers alone can hide what a system is actually doing, so this section looks at concrete outputs. Two patterns from the runs are worth showing directly: the verbosity effect that depresses the closed model’s Exact Match, and the adaptive loop doing its job on factoid questions. 

The verbosity effect. Table XI shows three questions where the closed model gave an answer that is correct in substance but was marked wrong by Exact Match because it included more than the gold answer. In each case the model’s answer contains the gold answer plus extra context, such as a state name or a fuller phrasing. A human would mark all three correct. This is the verbosity confound discussed earlier, and seeing the examples makes clear why Exact Match understates the closed model and why the token-level F1 scores, which give partial credit, are the fairer comparison across backbones. 

The adaptive loop on factoid questions. Table XII shows the adaptive loop on TriviaQA questions, with the confidence at the first round and the action it triggered. When the first answer is already confident the loop stops after a single round and spends nothing extra. When the first answer is not confident                               

> TABLE XI SUBSTANTIVELY CORRECT ANSWERS MARKED WRONG BY EXACT
> MATCH
> Gold answer Model answer EM / F1
> Wichita Wichita, Kansas 0 / high French the French language 0 / high 1912 in the year 1912 0 / high TABLE XII ADAPTIVE LOOP BEHAVIOUR ON TRIVIA QA Q UESTIONS
> First-round confidence Action Outcome
> 0.83 (high) stop at round 1 correct, 1 round 0.30 →0.77 retrieve more fixed in round 2 0.41 →0.79 retrieve more fixed in round 2 0.22 (stays low) stop at budget abstain-worthy

the loop retrieves more, and in several cases the second round produces the correct answer that the first round missed. This is the intended behaviour: cheap when the question is easy, willing to spend more when the question is hard. It is also the behaviour behind the TriviaQA accuracy gain in Table VI. 

Discussion. Pulling the results together, a few broader points stand out. The first is that the value of AB-RAG is not a single headline accuracy number but the reliability of its confidence. On every backbone the confidence separated correct from incorrect answers, and that property is what enables selective prediction, which is often more useful in practice than a small average accuracy gain. The second is that the adaptive policy engages to different degrees depending on the backbone, with the average number of iterations rising from 1.09 on the small model to 1.90 on the mid model and 1.81 on the closed model with TriviaQA. The engagement is non-monotonic in raw model size, which suggests that how much a model improves with more evidence depends on more than parameter count, 13 including how the model uses its context. The third is that several of the most useful findings here were negative or corrective, the failed evidence signal and the inverted retrieval signal, and they were only found because the signals were measured rather than assumed. The honest treatment of these results is, in the view taken here, a feature of the work rather than a blemish. 

Threats to validity. Several limits should be kept in mind when reading these results. The corpora are pooled open-retrieval corpora of a few thousand passages rather than the full Wikipedia collection, a deliberate choice forced by the single-laptop budget, so the absolute recall numbers would differ at web scale even if the comparisons between methods are expected to hold. The question counts are moderate, at five hundred for HotpotQA and two hundred for TriviaQA, which is why bootstrap confidence intervals are reported alongside the point estimates rather than left implicit. Exact Match penalises verbose but correct answers, which is reported openly and softened by also reporting F1. Finally, the self-consistency proxy uses three samples, and a larger number of samples might sharpen the Signal 1 estimate on closed models at additional cost. None of these limits undercuts the central finding that confidence predicts correctness, but each marks a place where a larger study could go further. VI. C ONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 

A. Conclusion 

This paper presented AB-RAG, a training-free and backbone-agnostic framework that makes retrieval-augmented question answering adaptive and budgeted. Instead of re-trieving a fixed number of passages for every query, AB-RAG generates an answer, estimates its confidence from three signals, and retrieves more evidence only when the answer is not yet confident, subject to a fixed budget. The framework runs on both open-weight models, using their real token probabilities, and closed APIs, using a self-consistency proxy in place of those probabilities, which is what lets it apply to the many deployed systems built on commercial models. The central and most robust finding is that the confidence estimate reliably separates correct from incorrect answers on every backbone tested, reaching a clean split of 57.6% against zero Exact Match between high- and low-confidence answers on a factoid dataset. This makes the method directly useful for selective prediction, where a system answers when confident and abstains or gathers more evidence when not. On capable backbones the confidence threshold also acts as a single knob that trades retrieval cost against accuracy, and on a paid API it doubles as a direct cost control because the budget bounds the number of calls a query can cause. The study also reported its negative and corrective findings in full: a small model that does not benefit from the adaptive policy, an evidence-consistency signal that fails on short answers for a clear mechanistic reason, and a retrieval-variance signal whose sign was found and corrected through measurement. The entire study was completed on a single consumer laptop with a 4 GB GPU and only a few dollars of API spend, which shows that careful, honest work on adaptive retrieval does not require large resources. 

B. Future Work 

Several directions follow naturally from these results. The most direct is to scale the retrieval corpus from the pooled open-retrieval setting used here to a full encyclopaedic collec-tion, to confirm that the confidence-correctness finding holds at web scale. A second direction is to design a better ground-ing signal for short answers to replace the failed evidence-consistency signal, for example a natural-language-inference check that asks whether the evidence entails the answer, or a direct string-match against the passages, both of which avoid the length-mismatch problem that defeated the cosine-similarity signal. A third direction is to learn the signal weights rather than set them by hand, since the ablation gives a clean supervised target in the form of single-signal AUROC. A fourth is to broaden the evaluation to more backbones and to long-form generation tasks, where the evidence-consistency signal might recover its value. A fifth is to study the latency of the adaptive loop, since extra retrieval rounds cost wall-clock time as well as money, and to characterise when the accuracy gain is worth the delay. A further direction connects this work to the author’s earlier study of adaptive, decentralised decision-making in multi-agent systems [4]. AB-RAG currently makes its retrieve-or-stop decision with a single agent acting on its own confidence. A natural extension is to treat retrieval, generation, and verifi-cation as separate cooperating agents that share signals and decide jointly how much evidence to gather, which would bring the budgeted-confidence idea developed here into the agentic, multi-agent setting explored in that earlier work. Pursuing this would tie together the two threads of adaptive decision-making under uncertainty: one in retrieval and one in multi-agent control. ACKNOWLEDGMENT 

The author thanks Dr. Anamika Dhillon of the Department of Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning, Manipal Uni-versity Jaipur, for her guidance and supervision throughout this project. REFERENCES [1] P. Lewis, E. Perez, A. Piktus, F. Petroni, V. Karpukhin, N. Goyal, H. K¨ uttler, M. Lewis, W.-t. Yih, T. Rockt¨ aschel, S. Riedel, and D. Kiela, “Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge-intensive NLP tasks,” in      

> Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , vol. 33, 2020, pp. 9459–9474. [2] A. Asai, Z. Wu, Y. Wang, A. Sil, and H. Hajishirzi, “Self-RAG: Learning to retrieve, generate, and critique through self-reflection,” in
> International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2024. [3] Z. Jiang, F. F. Xu, L. Gao, Z. Sun, Q. Liu, J. Dwivedi-Yu, Y. Yang, J. Callan, and G. Neubig, “Active retrieval augmented generation,” in
> Proc. Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-ing (EMNLP) , 2023, pp. 7969–7992. [4] A. Kamthan, “Learning to lead themselves: Agentic AI in MAS using MARL,” 2025, arXiv:2510.00022. [5] K. Shuster, S. Poff, M. Chen, D. Kiela, and J. Weston, “Retrieval augmentation reduces hallucination in conversation,” Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP , pp. 3784–3803, 2021.

14 [6] Y. Gao, Y. Xiong, X. Gao, K. Jia, J. Pan, Y. Bi, Y. Dai, J. Sun, and H. Wang, “Retrieval-augmented generation for large language models: A survey,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.10997 , 2023. [7] C. Guo, G. Pleiss, Y. Sun, and K. Q. Weinberger, “On calibration of modern neural networks,” in Proc. International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) , 2017, pp. 1321–1330. [8] S. Kadavath et al. , “Language models (mostly) know what they know,” 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.05221 , 2022. [9] V. Karpukhin, B. O˘ guz, S. Min, P. Lewis, L. Wu, S. Edunov, D. Chen, and W.-t. Yih, “Dense passage retrieval for open-domain question answering,” in Proc. Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) , 2020, pp. 6769–6781. [10] K. Guu, K. Lee, Z. Tung, P. Pasupat, and M.-W. Chang, “REALM: Retrieval-augmented language model pre-training,” in Proc. Interna-tional Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) , 2020, pp. 3929–3938. [11] S. Borgeaud et al. , “Improving language models by retrieving from trillions of tokens,” in Proc. International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) , 2022, pp. 2206–2240. [12] G. Izacard and E. Grave, “Leveraging passage retrieval with generative models for open domain question answering,” in Proc. Conf. European Chapter of the ACL (EACL) , 2021, pp. 874–880. [13] O. Ram, Y. Levine, I. Dalmedigos, D. Muhlgay, A. Shashua, K. Leyton-Brown, and Y. Shoham, “In-context retrieval-augmented language mod-els,” Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics ,vol. 11, pp. 1316–1331, 2023. [14] J. He, G. Neubig, and T. Berg-Kirkpatrick, “Efficient nearest neighbor language models,” in Proc. Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) , 2021, pp. 5703–5714. [15] T. Schick, J. Dwivedi-Yu, R. Dess` ı, R. Raileanu, M. Lomeli, E. Hambro, L. Zettlemoyer, N. Cancedda, and T. Scialom, “Toolformer: Language models can teach themselves to use tools,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , vol. 36, 2023. [16] R. Nakano et al. , “WebGPT: Browser-assisted question-answering with human feedback,” in arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.09332 , 2021. [17] O. Khattab, K. Santhanam, X. L. Li, D. Hall, P. Liang, C. Potts, and M. Zaharia, “Demonstrate-search-predict: Composing retrieval and language models for knowledge-intensive NLP,” in arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.14024 , 2022. [18] O. Press, M. Zhang, S. Min, L. Schmidt, N. A. Smith, and M. Lewis, “Measuring and narrowing the compositionality gap in language mod-els,” in Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP , 2023, pp. 5687–5711. [19] N. Thakur, N. Reimers, A. R¨ uckl´ e, A. Srivastava, and I. Gurevych, “BEIR: A heterogeneous benchmark for zero-shot evaluation of infor-mation retrieval models,” in Proc. NeurIPS Datasets and Benchmarks Track , 2021. [20] T. Kwiatkowski, J. Palomaki, O. Redfield, M. Collins, A. Parikh et al. ,“Natural questions: A benchmark for question answering research,” in 

Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics , vol. 7, 2019, pp. 453–466. [21] C. Malaviya, S. Lee, S. Chen, E. Sieber, M. Yatskar, and D. Roth, “ExpertQA: Expert-curated questions and attributed answers,” in Proc. NAACL , 2024, pp. 3025–3045. [22] F. Petroni, T. Rockt¨ aschel, S. Riedel, P. Lewis, A. Bakhtin, Y. Wu, and A. Miller, “Language models as knowledge bases?” Proc. Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) , pp. 2463–2473, 2019. [23] P. B´ echard and O. M. Ayala, “Reducing hallucination in structured outputs via retrieval-augmented generation,” in Proc. NAACL: Industry Track , 2024, pp. 228–238. [24] G. Izacard, P. Lewis, M. Lomeli, L. Hosseini, F. Petroni, T. Schick, J. Dwivedi-Yu, A. Joulin, S. Riedel, and E. Grave, “Atlas: Few-shot learning with retrieval augmented language models,” in Journal of Machine Learning Research , vol. 24, 2023, pp. 1–43. [25] J. Wei, X. Wang, D. Schuurmans, M. Bosma, B. Ichter, F. Xia, E. Chi, Q. Le, and D. Zhou, “Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , vol. 35, 2022, pp. 24 824–24 837. [26] S. Yao, J. Zhao, D. Yu, N. Du, I. Shafran, K. Narasimhan, and Y. Cao, “ReAct: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models,” in 

International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2023. [27] S. Es, J. James, L. Espinosa-Anke, and S. Schockaert, “RAGAS: Au-tomated evaluation of retrieval augmented generation,” in Proc. EACL: System Demonstrations , 2024, pp. 150–158. [28] J. Chen, H. Lin, X. Han, and L. Sun, “Benchmarking large language models in retrieval-augmented generation,” in Proc. AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , vol. 38, 2024, pp. 17 754–17 762. [29] H. Trivedi, N. Balasubramanian, T. Khot, and A. Sabharwal, “Interleav-ing retrieval with chain-of-thought reasoning for knowledge-intensive multi-step questions,” in Proc. Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL) , 2023, pp. 10 014–10 037. [30] Z. Shao, Y. Gong, Y. Shen, M. Huang, N. Duan, and W. Chen, “Enhanc-ing retrieval-augmented large language models with iterative retrieval-generation synergy,” in Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP , 2023, pp. 9248–9274. [31] S. Jeong, J. Baek, S. Cho, S. J. Hwang, and J. C. Park, “Adaptive-RAG: Learning to adapt retrieval-augmented large language models through question complexity,” in Proc. NAACL , 2024, pp. 7036–7050. [32] N. Varshney, W. Yao, H. Zhang, J. Chen, and D. Yu, “A stitch in time saves nine: Detecting and mitigating hallucinations of LLMs by vali-dating low-confidence generation,” in arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.03987 ,2023. [33] S. Robertson and H. Zaragoza, “The probabilistic relevance framework: BM25 and beyond,” Foundations and Trends in Information Retrieval ,vol. 3, no. 4, pp. 333–389, 2009. [34] S. E. Robertson, S. Walker, S. Jones, M. M. Hancock-Beaulieu, and M. Gatford, “Okapi at TREC-3,” in Proc. Third Text REtrieval Confer-ence (TREC-3) , 1995, pp. 109–126. [35] S. Xiao, Z. Liu, P. Zhang, and N. Muennighoff, “C-Pack: Packed resources for general Chinese embeddings,” in Proc. Int. ACM SIGIR Conf. Research and Development in Information Retrieval , 2024, pp. 641–649. [36] G. V. Cormack, C. L. A. Clarke, and S. B¨ uttcher, “Reciprocal rank fusion outperforms Condorcet and individual rank learning methods,” in 

Proc. Int. ACM SIGIR Conf. Research and Development in Information Retrieval , 2009, pp. 758–759. [37] R. Nogueira and K. Cho, “Passage re-ranking with BERT,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.04085 , 2019. [38] T. Nguyen, M. Rosenberg, X. Song, J. Gao, S. Tiwary, R. Majumder, and L. Deng, “MS MARCO: A human generated machine reading comprehension dataset,” in Proc. Workshop on Cognitive Computation (NeurIPS) , 2016. [39] O. Khattab and M. Zaharia, “ColBERT: Efficient and effective passage search via contextualized late interaction over BERT,” in Proc. Int. ACM SIGIR Conf. Research and Development in Information Retrieval , 2020, pp. 39–48. [40] Z. Jiang, J. Araki, H. Ding, and G. Neubig, “How can we know when language models know? On the calibration of language models for question answering,” Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics , vol. 9, pp. 962–977, 2021. [41] X. Wang, J. Wei, D. Schuurmans, Q. Le, E. Chi, S. Narang, A. Chowdh-ery, and D. Zhou, “Self-consistency improves chain of thought reasoning in language models,” in International Conference on Learning Repre-sentations (ICLR) , 2023. [42] Y. Gal and Z. Ghahramani, “Dropout as a Bayesian approximation: Representing model uncertainty in deep learning,” in Proc. International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) , 2016, pp. 1050–1059. [43] A. Mallen, A. Asai, V. Zhong, R. Das, D. Khashabi, and H. Hajishirzi, “When not to trust language models: Investigating the effectiveness of parametric and non-parametric memories,” in Proc. Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL) , 2023, pp. 9802– 9822. [44] S. Lin, J. Hilton, and O. Evans, “Teaching models to express their uncertainty in words,” in Transactions on Machine Learning Research ,2022. [45] C. Si, Z. Gan, Z. Yang, S. Wang, J. Wang, J. Boyd-Graber, and L. Wang, “Prompting GPT-3 to be reliable,” in International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2023. [46] L. Kuhn, Y. Gal, and S. Farquhar, “Semantic uncertainty: Linguistic invariances for uncertainty estimation in natural language generation,” in International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2023. [47] A. Paszke et al. , “PyTorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep learning library,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , vol. 32, 2019, pp. 8024–8035. [48] T. Wolf et al. , “Transformers: State-of-the-art natural language process-ing,” in Proc. EMNLP: System Demonstrations , 2020, pp. 38–45. 

15 [49] J. Johnson, M. Douze, and H. J´ egou, “Billion-scale similarity search with GPUs,” IEEE Transactions on Big Data , vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 535– 547, 2021. [50] N. Reimers and I. Gurevych, “Sentence-BERT: Sentence embeddings using Siamese BERT-networks,” in Proc. Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) , 2019, pp. 3982– 3992. [51] Z. Yang, P. Qi, S. Zhang, Y. Bengio, W. W. Cohen, R. Salakhutdinov, and C. D. Manning, “HotpotQA: A dataset for diverse, explainable multi-hop question answering,” in Proc. Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) , 2018, pp. 2369–2380. [52] M. Joshi, E. Choi, D. S. Weld, and L. Zettlemoyer, “TriviaQA: A large scale distantly supervised challenge dataset for reading comprehension,” in Proc. Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguis-tics (ACL) , 2017, pp. 1601–1611. [53] A. Yang et al. , “Qwen2.5 technical report,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.15115 , 2024. [54] A. Dubey et al. , “The Llama 3 herd of models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.21783 , 2024. [55] Anthropic, “The Claude 3 model family: Opus, Sonnet, Haiku,” An-thropic, Tech. Rep., 2024. 

16