Title: Structures Facilitate Retrieve, Rerank, and Generate

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.03247v1

Published Time: Wed, 03 Jun 2026 00:43:14 GMT

Number of Pages: 12

Markdown Content:
# Structures Facilitate Retrieve, Rerank, and Generate 

Yeqin Zhang 1,2, Haomin Fu 1,2, Xujie Zhang 1,2, and Cam-Tu Nguyen 1,2∗

1 State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China 

2 School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University, China 

zhangyeqin@smail.nju.edu.cn 

Abstract. Document-grounded dialogue systems (DGDS) utilize knowledge from external documents to answer domain-specific user questions. Existing solutions typically divide documents into independent passages for retrieval and response generation. This approach, however, neither makes good use of structural infor-mation within documents nor provides enough (document) context for knowledge selection and responses. This paper proposes SF-Re2G to address such issues systematically. Firstly, we seek to improve a passage representation by contrast-ing it with others of the same section, thus improving the retrieval performance. Secondly, a structure-enhanced reranker is built, leveraging the fact that multi-ple grounding passages of one dialog turn tend to be in the same neighborhood. Specifically, candidates from the retrieval are grouped into subgraphs according to the document structure. The reranker will rescore the candidate integrating its group information. Finally, the chosen passages are used for responses, taking into account the subgraph context for better generation. Experimental results on two DGDS datasets validate our method for both Chinese and English. 

Keywords: Structure-Aware Retrieval · Contrastive Learning · Passage Rerank-ing. 

1 Introduction HZ city > Social security and medical insurance > Unemployment Insurance Materials             

> Application Form
> ID Card
> Residence Card
> Required
> Yes
> Yes
> No
> Copies
> 2
> 1
> 1
> Size
> A4
> Not Speci fi ed
> Not Speci fi ed
> Handling Process: Step 1 (Application): the applicant submits the materials, or applies at the government
> Step 2 (Receiving): Conduct preliminary review on application materials.
> Step 3 (Recheck): check If the materials are incomplete or do not conform to the legal ...
> Step 4 (Review): the application can be processed within 1-3 working days upon receiving.
> Step 5 (Return): Send results back to the applicant using the chosen delivery method.
> U1 Can you tell me the procedure for the continuation of unemployment insurance? A1 Handling process: 1) Application; 2) Receiving; 3) Recheck; 4) Review; 5) Completion and 6) Delivery. Would you like to know more about the application step? U2 Not now, I'd like to know the processing time of the forth step? A2 1-3 working days ... U3 What materials do I need to submit to apply for unemployment bene fi ts? A3 It is required to submit the application form, social security card and the certi fi cate of termination of labor issued by the employer. U4 What is the required paper size of the application form? A4 A4
> Dialogue

Fig. 1. An example from Doc2Bot dataset. The left is a dialogue, and the right is a grounding document. The document is divided into several passages. Each step in the document and each cell in the table is treated as a passage.  

> arXiv:2606.03247v1 [cs.CL] 2 Jun 2026 2Anonymous Author(s)

Document-grounded dialogue systems (DGDS) [3,19,2] is a hot topic in natural language processing (NLP) research, in which a set of external documents the agent should base on to generate the response. By doing this, more meaningful and accurate responses can be generated by the dialog system. DGDS differs from traditional QA tasks in three aspects: multi-turn, close-domain, and document structure. Multi-turn re-sults in the fact that context is longer, and the interaction between context and candidate response must be considered. Close-domain makes the passages in the documents se-mantically related. This requires the knowledge selection module to focus on similar passages for response generation. Unlike the structured knowledge base and the knowl-edge graph, document structure is usually a tree structure formed by organizing the document and the knowledge in the document according to certain semantics or logic. The more semantically similar the two knowledge, the closer they are in the hyperbolic space [13] formed by this document structure tree. When multiple pieces of knowledge are needed to answer the user’s query, the distance between these pieces of knowledge is usually small in this space. Existing solutions [6,4] exploit the commonly used methods for open QA, ignor-ing the distinct characteristics of DGDS. Specifically, RAG [15] and Re2G [9] are utilized for knowledge retrieval and dialog generation. These methods, however, treat documents as textual sequences, which are then divided into independent passages for knowledge retrieval and response generation. Consequently, this gives raise to two main issues when applying to DGDS. First, it is nontrivial to have the right choice of granu-larity for passages. Long passages may contain more noise, whereas finer passages do not provide enough context for matching and generation. Second, the inherent struc-tures within the grounding documents are ignored, which might result in suboptimal retrieval and generation. Figure 1 illustrates the aforementioned issues with an example dialog from Doc2Bot [5] dataset. First, it is not easy to have the right choice of passage length. For question 

U1 , the system needs to have an overview of the whole handling process, which requires the knowledge from a large span of texts. On the other hand, for question U2 , we can just focus on the finer knowledge of Step 3 on the document. Having a long context may produce too much noise for the question U2 , but is better for question U1 . Second, the structure information is essential for some complex structure. As you can see from Fig-ure 1, questions from U3 to U4 are grounded on knowledge from a table. Although we can sequentialize the whole table for dense passage retrieval as in RAG and Re2G, we then lose the semantic connections between such as “Materials”-“Application Form”. To address these issues, we do not fix a passage length but exploit nodes in the doc-ument graph as passages retrieval. Note that, doing so results in passages of different length. For example, those that are in tables might be very short, and those correspond-ing to paragraphs are relatively longer. We then try to better integrate the context by exploiting document structures. Specifically, we propose a novel approach SF-Re2G that leverages structural infor-mation to facilitate the full DGDS process, including passage retrieval, reranking, and response generation. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work to systemati-cally study the impact of structure on the commonly used DGDS pipeline. In terms of retrieval, we make two improvements to the deep neural passage retrieval model DPR Structures Facilitate Retrieve, Rerank, and Generate 3

[11]. Inspired by TreeJC [25], we design a top-down aggregation to enhance the rep-resentation of passages using upper-level information such as paragraph headings and document names. Additionally, we recognize that passages under the same section in the document graph tend to have similar content, which makes them more difficult to be distinguished by the model. Therefore, we introduce a structural contrastive approach, which encourages the model to focus more on neighboring passages. For reranking, we dynamically construct some groups based on retrieved passages according to the doc-ument structure. Then we model the probability of candidate passages given the user’s query and the same group passages, producing a structurally enhanced reranking score. And during the generation process, we integrate this enhanced score into the generator using a weighting method similar to RAG [15] and Re2G [9]. We conduct experiments on the MultiDoc2Dial dataset [2] and Doc2Bot dataset [5], which have been recently introduced to build document grounded dialogue systems. We re-construct the document graphs for each knowledge document based on the original data. The experimental results prove the superiority of our method. The main contribu-tions of this work are: 

– We reveal that structural information is very valuable and not negligible for DGDS. Current methods that ignore these structural elements can result in suboptimal per-formance. 

– We introduce a novel method SF-Re2G, which integrates the structural information for all stages of DGDS. 

– Our method has a superior performance compared to other state-of-the-art ap-proaches in recent years. 

2 Related Works 

The primary DGDS pipeline can be simply divided into knowledge selection and re-sponse generation. Existing studies optimize one of these modules individually or opti-mize all of them as a whole. 

2.1 Knowledge Selection 

Extensive studies have proposed methods to improve knowledge selection from dif-ferent aspects. BM25 [23] uses traditional match-based methods to retrieve passages. DPR [11] is an early attempt for dense passage retrieval by deep neural networks. For a detailed discussion of other knowledge selection methods, please refer to S1.1 of the supplementary materials. 

2.2 Multi-turn Dialog Representation 

Some studies focus on multi-turn dialog matching. DAM [29] matches a candidate re-sponse to different granularities of the context (words, phrases, sentences). [24] per-forms deep interactions between the context and response by stacking multiple inter-action blocks. Additional multi-turn dialog representation approaches are presented in S1.2 of the supplementary materials, along with a discussion on the inefficiency of re-trieval models. 4 Anonymous Author(s) 

2.3 Knowledge-enhanced Generation 

There are several mainstream approaches combining knowledge to generation. Fusion-in-Decoder [10] technique concatenates the encoder outputs of retrieved passages as input for the decoder. RAG [15] and Re2G [9] take passage relevance scores to weight generation outputs. UniGDD [7] concatenates the texts of retrieved passages as input for the encoder. [16] proposed 2-stage decoders: the first generates output based on the context, and the second refines the response by integrating the document. [28] ex-ploited a decoding manager to decide if the response is generated from three compo-nents, the context processor, the language model, and the knowledge processor. The context processor and language model can be trained without knowledge grounding la-bels, whereas the knowledge processor can be trained with few samples. [26] proposed different strategies for combining the context and the document, including sequential (like UniGDD), concatenate (like Fusion-in-Decoder), alternate (like [16]), and inter-leave (some decoder attends to source, some to context). [8] fuses the context embed-ding and the encodings of facts with a simple sum. Decoders with copy mechanism [20,18] build shortcuts between the knowledge text and the outputs. Re2G [9] is closest to our approach. However, it is designed for generic knowledge augmented question answering or dialogue, ignoring the structural information widely available in documents, such as paragraphs, sequences, tables, etc. Some recent works have demonstrated the value of structural information, but they have only tried to use it in some modules of the DGDS pipeline [5], or in other tasks [25]. But for SF-Re2G, we integrate the structure into the entire processes of DGDS for the first time. Query x          

> Document Graphs G
> Query Encoder
> Generator
> Generator
> Generator p(y|x,z 1,G sub )
> p(y|x) Passage Encoder Feature Space Rerank —Structural Contrastive
> Query x z1Gsub
> Query x z2Gsub
> Query x z3Gsub
> Query x z4Gsub
> Top-k Passages for Generation p(y|x,z 2,G sub )p(y|x,z 4,G sub )

Fig. 2. The architecture of SF-Re2G. Like Re2G, SF-Re2G consists of a retrieval module, a rerank module, and a generation module. For retrieval, we design Structural Contrastive to enhance the negative sampling. For rerank and generation, we construct a subgraph for each passage to fuse more information. 

3 Methodology 

The problem of DGDS can be described as follows. Assuming a collection of D doc-uments, we split each document into multiple passages and get M total passages Z =

{z1, ..., z M }. Given a conversational history x = ( u1, a 1, ..., u t−1, a t−1, u t), where uiStructures Facilitate Retrieve, Rerank, and Generate 5

and ai are respectively the i-th user and agent utterances, our task is to generate the next system answer at based on the passage collection. To fuse the structural informa-tion in the documents to DGDS, we transform each document into a document graph 

G, and the nodes of it will be regarded as the passages set Z. For our approach, we will construct a subgraph Gsub for each core passage, based on the whole document graph 

G.The overall architecture of SF-Re2G is shown in Figure 2. We follow the Retrieval-Rerank-Generation architecture. The retrieval module needs to efficiently find the top k passages relevant to a dialogue context. After that, a much more powerful rerank mod-ule will sort the retrieved passages more precisely. Finally, a generator will produce a response based on the top passages and their relevance scores. The detail of our method is described as follows. 

3.1 Retrieval 

The aim of the dense passage retrieval task is, given the user’s query and all the passages from documents, to retrieve a set of passages that best matches the user’s query. For each instance, a set of negative passages are required for the dense passage retrieval task. Through the comparison of positive and negative passages, the model can learn how to find the passages which best match the user’s query. Therefore, the selection of negative passages will directly affect the performance of the model, and the selection of hard negatives is the most important among negative sampling. The goal of the Retriever model is to efficiently find the top k (k << M ) passages relevant to a dialogue context. We apply the Bi-encoder architecture for its efficiency. Specifically, a dialogue context C and a passage candidate p are first encoded by two separate BERT (base) encoders. The similarity scoring function is then defined as the dot product of the encoder outputs: 

Pret (p|C) ∝ dot [BERT c(C), BERT p(p)] = sim η1 (C, p ) (1) 

Training Due to its high efficiency, BM25 is a common choice for sampling hard nega-tive passages. However, considering the similarity of passages only based on the token by BM25 is far from enough for model learning. For the dense passage retrieval task, we utilize document structure to propose a more efficient hard negative sampling method that takes the semantic and logical similarity of the passages into account. The document structure is a special kind of structure, which is usually a tree struc-ture formed by artificially organizing documents and passages according to certain se-mantics or logic. The more semantically similar the two pieces of knowledge, the closer they are in this document structure tree space, which helps us find hard negative sample easily on semantics and logic aspect. To learn a better embedding function, we optimize the loss function as the negative log-likelihood of the positive passage: 

L(qi, p + 

> i

, {p− 

> i,j

}m−1 

> j=1

, p h−

> i,m

)6 Anonymous Author(s) 

= −log esim (q,p + 

> i)

esim (q,p +  

> i)

+ Pm−1 

> j=1

esim (q,p −  

> i,j )

+ esim (q,p h− 

> i,m )

(2) 

where qi includes the current turn of user query and the dialog history between the user and the system, p+ 

> i

indicates one relevant (positive) passage, {p− 

> i,j

}m−1 

> j=1

indicates in-batch negatives, ph− 

> i,m

indicates hard negative, where ph− 

> i,m

is sampled from the neigh-borhood of p+ 

> i

according to the document structure. 1     

> 2
> 39
> 8
> 7
> Document
> Structure
> 10
> 45611 12
> Non-candidate node
> Candidate node

Cross-Encoder              

> [CLS] Query [SEP] [Core] Core
> Passage(3) [Others] Subgraph
> Passages [SEP]
> [CLS]
> Score
> Query [SEP] [Core] Core
> Passage (3) [Others] Subgraph
> Passages [SEP]

Fig. 3. The architecture of the Reranker. 

3.2 Reranker 

As a bridge between the retrieval module and generation module, on the one hand, a Reranker needs to rescore the candidates from the Retrieval through the cross-encoder structure, which is more time-consuming but more accurate than the bi-encoder struc-ture to obtain a more effective score. On the other hand, the rerank rescores the candi-dates and directly affects the generation module. Based on the candidates from the Retrieval, the subgraph constructed according to the document structure, on the one hand, model the co-occurrence between different groundings. In the dataset, there are multiple grounding passages for one instance, like Doc2Bot[5]. If the passage in the same group that has a high co-occurrence probability with the current passage matches the current question, the probability of the current pas-sage should be improved. On the other hand, if the passage in the same group that does not have the possibility or has a low probability of co-occurrence matches the current question, the probability of the current passage being matched should be reduced. Instead of inputting origin candidate passages [21,1] from the Retrieval, we first group all candidate passages from the Retrieval into different subgraphs according to some rules: 1. The passages in different documents will not appear in the same subgraph. Structures Facilitate Retrieve, Rerank, and Generate 7

2. The passages of the same document are grouped into the subgraph in a depth-first way to ensure that the distance of these passages in the hyperbolic space formed by the document structure is close enough. 3. Determine whether to create a new subgraph according to the limited length of the input document and the length of the current subgraph. Candidates from the retrieval are grouped into subgraphs according to the document structure and max input length. For scoring the candidate passages, we combine the origin passage with passages in the same subgraph to replace the origin passage. As is shown in Figure 3, candidate passages nodes 3, 4, 6, 7, 8, 9, and 12 on this document form two clusters, where nodes 3, 4, 6 and 7 are in the same group and nodes 8, 9, and 12 are in the other group. The model input X for a passage px of l other passages in same subgraph becomes: 

X = [cls] query [sep] [core] px [others] p1 [sep] ... pl [sep] where ‘dialog’ includes the current turn of user query and the dialog history be-tween the user and the system. ‘[core]’ is a special token indicating the start of the core passage. ‘[others]’ is a special token indicating the start of other passages which is under the same document graph with the core passage. A linear layer and softmax layer are then used on top of the [CLS] output of the cross-encoder model to obtain the similarity. 

Training Compared to the Retrieval, the Reranker is expected to rescore the candidates provided by the Retrieval and get a more accurate result through CrossEncoder archi-tecture. The loss function for optimizing the Reranker is the same as the Retrieval: the negative log-likelihood of the positive passage. 

3.3 Generation 

For response generation, we consider the role of structural information in two ways. First, the structurally enhanced rerank scores mentioned in section 3.2 can reflect the difference in importance of the retrieved grounding passages. Second, similar to rerank, the information from neighbor nodes can help the generator better understand the con-tent. Based on these two considerations, we design a structure-fused weighting method for generation similar to [15,9,27]. Differ from earlier interactive methods [7] or later interactive methods [12], the weighting method can directly leverage a grounded gen-eration model trained on a single passage as input, retaining the knowledge in the pre-trained model as much as possible. It also yields flexibility in the number of top pas-sages for the generation. Assuming the output of the generation model at step i is yi and model parameters are θ, we calculate the probability of the output token at the current step by: 

p(yi|x) = X

> z∈top k

pη (z|x, G sub )pθ (yi|x, z, G sub , y <i ) (3) Here, pη (·|· ) is the output of the Rerank model, η are the parameters it, and Gsub is the subgraph around the retrieved passage z. In this way, we use structurally enhanced rerank scores to assign weights to each input passage, and our generative model can 8 Anonymous Author(s) 

ground on not only the retrieved passage but also its context. In practice, we reuse the sub-graph Gsub constructed in the rerank stage, making our method more convenient and efficient. We use a pre-trained BART [14] model as the backbone network of the generator. The generator takes the concatenation of dialog history x, retrieved passage 

z, and the sequential sub-graph Gsub as inputs. Moreover, the token sequence with the highest probability will be the output. 

Training Thanks to the feature of weight methods, we can easily implement the joint training of the reranker and generator without additional fine-tuning for the pre-trained BART model. End-to-end training can use the generated results to correct the weights given by the reranker, resulting in a better performance in the generation. Due to the limitation of model input sequence length, we will truncate the conversation history and keep only the most recent conversations. Between grounding passage z and subgraph 

Gsub , we will prioritize keeping z in the input. 

4 Experiments 

The implementation of our method is in PyTorch and the pre-trained models we used are from HuggingFace Transformers 3. The experimental details, including the hyperpa-rameters and pre-trained models, can refer to the S3 of the supplementary materials. 

4.1 Dataset 

We conduct experiments on MultiDoc2Dial [2] and Doc2Bot [5] datasets. One of them is in English, and another is in Chinese, which can verify the cross-linguistic ability of our model. The statistics of them are shown in Table 1.                     

> Table 1. Statistics of MultiDoc2Dial and Doc2Bot training set. Resp. Num. means the number of instances, Resp. Len. is the average length of system response. Dataset Domains Resp. Num. Resp. Len. MultiDoc2Dial ssa 4,993 18.80 va 6,238 20.81 dmv 6,135 21.39 student 4,085 20.37 Doc2Bot health 1,241 39.60 tech. 1,181 64.74 insurance 1,471 67.71 wikihow 1,856 61.47
> 3https://huggingface.co Structures Facilitate Retrieve, Rerank, and Generate 9

MultiDoc2Dial provides a training set of 3,474 dialogs corresponding to 48,002 utter-ances and 661 dialogs corresponding to 9,195 utterances for evaluation. The docu-ments are written in English and collected from 4 domains. 

Doc2Bot provides a training set of 800 dialogs corresponding to 11,485 utterances and 200 dialogs corresponding to 2,941 utterances for evaluation until now. The documents of it are written in Chinese and collected from 4 domains. 

4.2 Retrieval and Reranking                               

> Table 2. Ablation study result of Retrieval and Rerank on MultiDoc2Dial and Doc2Bot. Method MultiDoc2Dial Doc2Bot
> R@1 R@5 R@10 R@100 R@1 R@5 R@10 R@100
> BM25 0.136 0.312 0.406 0.727 0.067 0.178 0.250 0.581 DPR 0.402 0.661 0.745 0.925 0.468 0.713 0.798 0.950
> DPR struct (ours) 0.424 0.682 0.771 0.938 0.486 0.723 0.807 0.950 R@1 R@5 R@10 Rprec R@1 R@5 R@10 Rprec
> CrossEncoder struct (ours) 0.550 0.783 0.832 0.553 0.559 0.757 0.820 0.624
> CrossEncoder 0.547 0.785 0.841 0.550 0.550 0.741 0.823 0.606

Metrics We use Recall@1, Recall@5, Recall@10 and Recall@100 to evaluate the re-trieval result. Because the input of the Reranker is from top@100 from the retrieval, Recall@100 for each rerank model is same. We use Recall@1, Recall@5, Recall@10 and Rprec to evaluate the rerank result. 

Baselines For the retrieval part, we apply a common but efficient method, DPR, to ensure the comparability of the final experiment. Inspired by TreeJC [25], we modify the baseline by adding top-down aggregation to the passage to enhance the representa-tion of passages using upper-level information such as paragraph headings and docu-ment names. We conduct an ablation study to validate the effectiveness of our proposed structure-based negative sampling strategy. For the rerank part, we apply a finetune CrossEncoder pretraining model, RoBERTa. Inspired by TreeJC [25], we also add the top-down aggregation to the passage for the input of RoBERTa to build a strong baseline model. 

Discussion As we can see from Table 2, on both the MultiDoc2Dial dataset and Doc2Bot dataset, we can see the performance will also drop significantly: Averagely, on Mult-Doc2Dial, there is about 2% drop; on doc2bot, there is about 1% drop. We conduct an ablation study to validate the effectiveness of adding the structure information on Reranker. As we can see from Table 2, on the Doc2Bot dataset, by adding the structure information on Reranker, there is about a 1% improvement on every metric on average, 10 Anonymous Author(s) 

but on the MultiDoc2Dial dataset with less structural information, no obvious change appears on evaluation metrics. 

4.3 Response Generation                                         

> Table 3. Generation results of compared methods on MultiDoc2Dial and Doc2Bot. We replaced the generator in Re2G with Fusion-in-Decoder to form Re2FiD. w/o subgraph means remov-ing the subgraph in the generation stage while keeping the retrieval and rerank unchanged. Method MultiDoc2Dial Doc2Bot
> F1 S-BLEU ROUGE F1 S-BLEU ROUGE
> RAG [15] 35.92 17.54 32.41 49.39 30.21 49.64 Re2G [9] 42.30 22.78 38.08 54.53 36.17 54.78 Re2FiD* [12] 42.22 23.35 38.39 57.09 38.31 55.10 SF-Re2G (ours) 42.13 23.06 37.95 57.04 37.49 57.38
> SF-Re2G w/o subgraph (ours) 43.65 24.12 39.62 55.85 36.05 55.97

Metrics We use token-level F1 score, SacreBLEU [22], and ROUGE [17] to evaluate the response. The code of them is similar to MultiDoc2Dial 4. For the Chinese dataset Doc2Bot, we regard every character as a token. 

Baselines We use the recent SOTA methods, including RAG [15], Re2G [9] and Fusion-in-Decoder [12], as baselines. For more details of these methods, please refer to S2 in the supplementary materials. 

Discussion Table 3 shows the generation results. As we can see, our SF-Re2G can obtain SOTA performance under multiple metrics for both datasets. It is worth noting that our generator uses only half of the parameters of Re2FiD and still achieves better performance. The interesting thing is that the generation performance drops about 1 point for all evaluation metrics in Doc2Bot dataset after removing the subgraph from the input sequence, but in MultiDoc2Dial the performance improves. We conjecture that on the dataset with insignificant structural information like MultiDoc2Dial, subgraphs do not lead to better results for the generation. Instead, using the original passage with our structure enhanced rerank yields higher performance. 

5 Conclusion 

This paper presented SF-Re2G, a novel approach that uses the structural information in the document source to facilitate DGDS. Unlike prior works, which focus solely on the  

> 4https://github.com/IBM/multidoc2dial

Structures Facilitate Retrieve, Rerank, and Generate 11 

textual content of the document knowledge, SF-Re2G systematically investigates the role of structural information on DGDS. We design different methods to fuse the struc-tural information into the different stages of DGDS pipeline. Our experimental results showed that: 1) the hard negative samples collected from the document structure are more difficult to distinguish and meaningful to distinguish than those collected based on BM25, which can bring about 1 % or more improvement on both the MultiDoc2Dial dataset and Doc2Bot dataset 2) For the candidate of retrieval, the subgraph is built based on the document structure, which can increase the matching and comparison informa-tion so that the rerank can be improved by about 1%. 3) the subgraph information could be helpful if the original documents have some structures. We hope that our approach and such observations will raise awareness of the importance of structural information and be helpful for future research in this direction. 

References 

1. Dong, Q., Liu, Y., Cheng, S., Wang, S., Cheng, Z., Niu, S., Yin, D.: Incorporating explicit knowledge in pre-trained language models for passage re-ranking. In: Proceedings of the 45th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval (2022) 2. Feng, S., Patel, S.S., Wan, H., Joshi, S.: Multidoc2dial: Modeling dialogues grounded in mul-tiple documents. In: Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (2021) 3. Feng, S., Wan, H., Gunasekara, C., Patel, S., Joshi, S., Lastras, L.: doc2dial: A goal-oriented document-grounded dialogue dataset. In: Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (2020) 4. Feng, Y., Han, Z., Sun, M., Li, P.: Multi-hop open-domain question answering over structured and unstructured knowledge. In: Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics (2022) 5. Fu, H., Zhang, Y., Yu, H., Sun, J., Huang, F., Si, L., Li, Y., Nguyen, C.T.: Doc2bot: Ac-cessing heterogeneous documents via conversational bots. Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics (2022) 6. Fu, Y.: Towards unification of discourse annotation frameworks. In: Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Student Research Work-shop (2022) 7. Gao, C., Zhang, W., Lam, W.: UniGDD: A unified generative framework for goal-oriented document-grounded dialogue. In: Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (2022) 8. Ghazvininejad, M., Brockett, C., Chang, M.W., Dolan, B., Gao, J., Yih, W.t., Galley, M.: A knowledge-grounded neural conversation model. In: Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (2018) 9. Glass, M., Rossiello, G., Chowdhury, M.F.M., Naik, A., Cai, P., Gliozzo, A.: Re2G: Retrieve, rerank, generate. In: Proceedings of the 2022 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (2022) 10. Izacard, G., Grave, E.: Leveraging passage retrieval with generative models for open domain question answering. In: Proceedings of the 16th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics (2021) 11. Karpukhin, V., Oguz, B., Min, S., Lewis, P., Wu, L., Edunov, S., Chen, D., Yih, W.t.: Dense passage retrieval for open-domain question answering. In: Proceedings of the 2020 Confer-ence on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (2020) 12 Anonymous Author(s) 12. Lakhotia, K., Paranjape, B., Ghoshal, A., Yih, S., Mehdad, Y., Iyer, S.: FiD-ex: Improving sequence-to-sequence models for extractive rationale generation. In: Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (2021) 13. Lamping, J., Rao, R., Pirolli, P.: A focus+ context technique based on hyperbolic geome-try for visualizing large hierarchies. In: Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems (1995) 14. Lewis, M., Liu, Y., Goyal, N., Ghazvininejad, M., Mohamed, A., Levy, O., Stoyanov, V., Zettlemoyer, L.: Bart: Denoising sequence-to-sequence pre-training for natural language generation, translation, and comprehension. In: Proceedings of the 58th annual meeting of the association for computational linguistics (2020) 15. Lewis, P., Perez, E., Piktus, A., Petroni, F., Karpukhin, V., Goyal, N., Küttler, H., Lewis, M., Yih, W.t., Rocktäschel, T., et al.: Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge-intensive nlp tasks. Advances in neural information processing systems (2020) 16. Li, Z., Niu, C., Meng, F., Feng, Y., Li, Q., Zhou, J.: Incremental transformer with deliberation decoder for document grounded conversations. In: Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (2019) 17. Lin, C.Y.: Rouge: A package for automatic evaluation of summaries. In: Text summarization branches out (2004) 18. Lin, X., Jian, W., He, J., Wang, T., Chu, W.: Generating informative conversational response using recurrent knowledge-interaction and knowledge-copy. In: Proceedings of the 58th an-nual meeting of the association for computational linguistics (2020) 19. Ma, L., Li, M., Zhang, W.N., Li, J., Liu, T.: Unstructured text enhanced open-domain dia-logue system: A systematic survey. ACM Transactions on Information Systems (2021) 20. Meng, C., Ren, P., Chen, Z., Monz, C., Ma, J., de Rijke, M.: Refnet: A reference-aware network for background based conversation. In: Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence (2020) 21. Nogueira, R.F., Cho, K.: Passage re-ranking with BERT. CoRR (2019) 22. Post, M.: A call for clarity in reporting BLEU scores. In: Proceedings of the Third Confer-ence on Machine Translation: Research Papers (2018) 23. Robertson, S., Zaragoza, H.: The probabilistic relevance framework: BM25 and beyond. Now Publishers Inc (2009) 24. Tao, C., Wu, W., Xu, C., Hu, W., Zhao, D., Yan, R.: One time of interaction may not be enough: Go deep with an interaction-over-interaction network for response selection in di-alogues. In: Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (2019) 25. Wan, H., Feng, S., Gunasekara, C., Patel, S.S., Joshi, S., Lastras, L.: Does structure matter? encoding documents for machine reading comprehension. In: Proceedings of the 2021 Con-ference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (2021) 26. Wang, X., Weston, J., Auli, M., Jernite, Y.: Improving conditioning in context-aware se-quence to sequence models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.09728 (2019) 27. Zhang, Y., Sun, S., Gao, X., Fang, Y., Brockett, C., Galley, M., Gao, J., Dolan, B.: Retgen: A joint framework for retrieval and grounded text generation modeling. In: Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (2022) 28. Zhao, X., Wu, W., Tao, C., Xu, C., Zhao, D., Yan, R.: Low-resource knowledge-grounded dialogue generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.10348 (2020) 29. Zhou, X., Li, L., Dong, D., Liu, Y., Chen, Y., Zhao, W.X., Yu, D., Wu, H.: Multi-turn response selection for chatbots with deep attention matching network. In: Proceedings of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (2018)