Title: RCEM: Embedder Equipped with Query Rewriting Skill for Robust Conversational Search in Distributional Shift

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.01697v1

Published Time: Tue, 02 Jun 2026 02:03:56 GMT

Number of Pages: 8

Markdown Content:
# RCEM: Embedder Equipped with Query Rewriting Skill for Robust Conversational Search in Distributional Shift 

Kilho Son 1, Paul Hsu, Cha Zhang, Dinei Florencio 

15010 NE 36th Street, Redmond, WA 98052, US 

{kilhoson, paulhsu, chazhang, dinei}@microsoft.com 

Abstract 

Conversational search has become increasingly important in retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) systems, where users interact with AI assistants through multi-turn conversations con-taining context-dependent queries. We propose RCEM, a conversational dense retrieval model that distills the query reformulation capabil-ity of LLMs into the embedding model, en-abling context-aware retrieval without explicit query rewriting during inference. Unlike prior conversational dense retrieval approaches that learn direct conversation-to-document match-ing, RCEM aligns conversational-query em-beddings with rewritten-query embeddings, im-proving robustness under distributional shift. RCEM does not require conversational query-to-document relevance mappings for training, which are often expensive and difficult to ob-tain with high quality. Extensive experiments on QReCC, TopiOCQA, and TREC CAsT demonstrate that RCEM consistently outper-forms strong conversational retrieval baselines, achieving particularly large gains under distri-butional shift, including up to 20% improve-ment in Recall@10. RCEM further extends the base embedding model with conversational query rewriting capability while preserving its original retrieval functionality, allowing both standalone and conversational queries to be en-coded by a single model and searched against existing document indexes without rebuilding the retrieval database. 

1 Introduction 

Conversational search has become a fundamental component of modern retrieval-augmented gener-ation (RAG) systems, where users interact with AI assistants through multi-turn dialogue rather than isolated queries. In these interactions, user queries are often context-dependent and omit in-formation mentioned in previous turns. Resolving 

> 1

Corresponding author [ST]       

> q0: What is a physician’s assistant?
> a0: Physician assistant are medical …
> q1: What are the educational requirements ..
> a1: Complete your bachelor degree …
> [ST]
> 𝑞 2: What does it cost?
> Rewrite to
> What does it cost to become a physician's assistant ?
> Comput eembedding of
> What does it cost to become a physician's assistant?
> RCEM
> Dense (Vector) Search
> q0: What is a physician’s assistant?
> a0: Physician assistant are medical …
> q1: What are the educational requirements ..
> a1: Complete your bachelor degree …
> 𝑞 2: What does it cost?
> Rewrite to
> What does it cost to become a physician's assistant?
> Compute embedding of
> What does it cost to become a physician's assistant?
> LLM
> Embedder
> Dense (Vector) Search
> (a) Prior methods (b) Proposed RCEM

Figure 1: Overview : The proposed a RCEM that pro-duces embedding of a rewritten query directly from a conversational context. With one-step inference (trig-gered with Special Token, [ST]), RCEM enables an embedder to implicitly resolve the conversation into a clear standalone query and computes its embedding, eliminating the need for a separate rewriting stage. Im-portantly, RCEM equips an embedder with an additional query-rewriting capability while preserving its original standalone query functionality and maintaining the same embedding space. As a result, an RCEM remains com-patible with existing retrieval systems: both standalone queries and conversational queries can be encoded by the same model and searched against an existing docu-ment index without rebuilding the database. 

such contextual dependencies is therefore essential for retrieving relevant documents and generating accurate responses. A common solution is to rewrite conversational queries into standalone queries using large lan-guage models (LLMs) before retrieval. Recent ad-vances in conversational query reformulation and conversational dense retrieval have substantially improved retrieval effectiveness in multi-turn set-tings (Mao et al., 2023b; Mo et al., 2024b; Lai et al., 2025a). However, existing approaches still face im-portant limitations. LLM-based rewriting pipelines require expensive generation during inference, in-troducing substantial latency and computational cost. On the other hand, conversational dense re-trieval methods typically learn direct conversation-

> arXiv:2606.01697v1 [cs.CL] 1 Jun 2026

to-document matching using collection-specific rel-evance supervision, which may reduce robustness under distributional shift. In this work, we propose RCEM, an embedding model that directly encodes conversational context into an embedding corresponding to the rewritten standalone query. Instead of explicitly generat-ing rewritten text with separate step before embed-ding, RCEM distills the query rewriting capability of LLMs into the embedding model by aligning conversational-query embeddings with rewritten-query embeddings, while preserving compatibil-ity with existing document embedding spaces which enables to use existing retrieval indexes. Unlike prior conversational dense retrieval ap-proaches (Lin et al., 2021; Yang et al., 2025b), RCEM does not rely on conversation-document relevance mappings during training. By learn-ing alignment toward rewritten-query embeddings rather than document relevance patterns, RCEM improves generalization and robustness across re-trieval distributions. Acquiring high-quality con-versational query-to-document relevance mappings is often expensive and challenging, limiting scal-able training. In contrast, RCEM does not require such annotations, making it easier to scale training and improve generalization. Extensive experiments demonstrate that RCEM consistently outperforms strong conversational re-trieval baselines, with particularly strong gains un-der challenging distribution-shift settings. Our contributions are summarized as follows: • We propose RCEM, a conversational embed-ding model that distills LLM-based query rewriting capability into the embedding space, enabling conversational retrieval without ex-plicit query rewriting step before embedding. • Unlike existing conversational dense retrieval methods that optimize direct conversation-to-document matching, RCEM learns alignment between conversational inputs and rewritten-query embeddings, improving robustness un-der distributional shift. Extensive experiments show that RCEM achieves state-of-the-art con-versational retrieval performance. • RCEM preserves compatibility with exist-ing retrieval infrastructures, including pre-computed document embeddings and retrieval indexes, without requiring document-side re-encoding. 

2 Related Works 

Prior conversational search research can be broadly categorized into two streams: conversational query reformulation (CQR) and conversational dense re-trieval (CDR). CQR methods rewrite conversa-tional utterances into standalone queries before retrieval while CDR methods directly encode con-versational context into dense representations for retrieval. 

Conversational Query Reformulation. Con-versational query reformulation methods trans-form conversational queries into standalone search queries that can be directly consumed by sparse retrievers or dense retrievers after embedding. Mo et al. (2023) propose ConvGQR, a genera-tive reformulation framework for conversational search. Mao et al. (2023a) introduce search-oriented conversational query editing to better pre-serve retrieval-oriented intent during reformulation. With the rise of large language models, Mao et al. (2023b) propose a prompting-based conversational search framework that leverages LLMs for contex-tual query understanding. Ye et al. (2023) further enhance reformulation quality using LLM-aided informative query rewriting. Mo et al. (2024a) pro-pose CHIQ, which improves reformulation through contextual history enhancement. Lai et al. (2025b) introduce AdaCQR, which aligns sparse and dense retrieval signals to improve query reformulation effectiveness. (Lai et al., 2025a) introduces a test-time adaptation framework that leverages prompting-based candidate generation and reward-guided selection to improve conversational query rewriting quality. CQR approaches are more modu-lar and retriever-agnostic, enabling easy integra-tion with existing sparse or dense retrieval sys-tems. They also naturally benefit from advances in large language models and prompting techniques. However, this approach incurs substantial compu-tational cost and inference latency due to repeated LLM calls, making it difficult to deploy for all user requests at scale. 

Conversational Dense Retrieval. Conversa-tional dense retrieval methods aim to model depen-dency across dialogue turns within the retriever it-self. Lin et al. (2021) propose contextualized query embeddings that incorporate conversation history into dense retrieval representations for conversa-tional search. Mo et al. (2024b) introduce history-aware conversational dense retrieval, which explic-itly models historical interactions for improved con-text understanding. Mao et al. (2024) presents Cha-tRetriever, which adapts large language models for generalized conversational dense retrieval with stronger robustness across search settings. Cheng et al. (2024) further study the interpretability of conversational dense retrieval through rewriting-enhanced inversion of session embeddings. (Yang et al., 2025b) proposes a contextual retrieval frame-work that learns robust conversational representa-tions by modeling dialogue context directly within the retriever. These methods benefit from end-to-end optimization and deep integration of conver-sational context within retrieval representations. However, existing conversational dense retrieval methods often require specialized retriever train-ing based on contrastive learning between con-versational queries and ground-truth documents. Acquiring high-quality conversation-to-document relevance mappings is expensive and challenging, which limits scalable training. Moreover, training with limited conversational relevance data can eas-ily lead to overfitting. Contrastive objectives may also alter the original embedding space, reducing compatibility with existing retrieval systems. In contrast, RCEM does not require conversation-to-document relevance supervision for training and is explicitly designed to preserve the original embed-ding space, improving generalization, scalability, and system compatibility. 

3 RCEM 

We propose RCEM, a conversational embed-ding model that directly maps conversational inputs into the embedding space of rewritten standalone queries. Unlike conventional conversational search pipelines that rely on explicit LLM-based query rewriting during inference, RCEM distills rewrit-ing capability into an embedding model, enabling low-latency conversational retrieval while preserv-ing compatibility with existing retrieval indexes. See an overview of the RCEM and comparison with the prior work (Lin et al., 2021) in Figure 2. 

Setting. Let qi denote the current query at dia-logue turn i, and let q<i , a <i denote the previous conversational history. Dgt i is a groundtruth docu-ment of the conversational query qi; q<i , a <i . Di

and qi represent a general document and standalone query respectively. Existing conversational search systems commonly use an LLM-based rewriter 

Ri = LLM (qi; q<i , a <i ),

where Ri is a standalone rewritten query suitable for retrieval. To distinguish conversational retrieval from standard retrieval, we prepend a special token 

[ST ] to the conversational input: 

ci = [ ST , q i; q<i a<i ].

We have two embedding functions Fθ(x) and 

G(x), where, 

Fθ(x) = MLP SELU (LoRA( G(x))) .G(x) is original embedder and Fθ(x) is built on top of the frozen G(x) with LoRA adapters and a lightweight two-layer perceptron head with SELU activation. The backbone parameters are initialized from G(x), while only the LoRA adapters and the MLP head are updated during training. 

Structure Learning. RCEM updates parameters, 

θ in embedder Fθ by minimizing loss below: 

L(θ) = Lpoint (θ) + λLpair (θ),

Lpoint (θ) = X

> j∈Ω

∥zj, 1 − zj, 2∥Lpair (θ) = X

> j∈Ω
> X
> k∈Ω\j

(∥zj, 1 − zk, 1∥ − ∥ zj, 2 − zk, 2∥) ,

where λ controls the contribution of the pair-wise structure term. We set λ as 1. unless oth-erwise stated. zj, 1 is j-th embedding from Fθ(x)

where x is {ci, q i, D i} ∈ Ωtrain and zj, 2 is cor-responding j-th embedding from G(x) where x

is {Ri, q i, D i} ∈ Ωtrain . By mapping conver-sational query with special token toward rewrit-ten query by LLM Fθ(ci) → G(Ri), RCEM dis-tills conversational query rewriting behavior into the embedding space without explicitly generat-ing rewritten text. Instead of generating Ri during inference, RCEM directly encodes the conversa-tional input into the embedding representation of the rewritten query. Unlike prior methods (Lin et al., 2021; Yang et al., 2025b), RCEM does not require ground-truth document mappings Dgt i for conversational queries (qi; q<i a<i ). This removes the dependence on expensive and difficult-to-obtain conversational relevance annotations, making the training pipeline more scalable and improving ro-bustness under distributional shift. While distilling Embedding space, Changed                             

> 𝐹 𝑞 𝑖 ;𝑞 <𝑖 𝑎 <𝑖
> 𝐷 𝑖
> 𝑔𝑡
> 𝐹 (𝑞 𝑖 ;𝑞 <𝑖 𝑎 <𝑖 )
> 𝐺 𝐺 (𝐷 𝑖
> 𝑔𝑡 )
> 𝑞 𝑖 ;𝑞 <𝑖 𝑎 <𝑖 𝐸𝑚𝑏 𝑞 𝑖 ;𝑞 <𝑖 𝑎 <𝑖 :Conversational search on existing index
> 𝑞 𝑖 𝐸𝑚𝑏 𝑞 𝑖 :Normal search on existing index
> with less performance
> contrastive
> 𝐹
> Embedding space, Changed
> 𝐹 θ𝑞 𝑖 ;𝑞 <𝑖 𝑎 <𝑖
> 𝐷 𝑖
> 𝑔𝑡
> 𝐹 (𝑞 𝑖 ;𝑞 <𝑖 𝑎 <𝑖 )
> 𝐺 𝐺 (𝐷 𝑖
> 𝑔𝑡 )
> 𝑞 𝑖 ;𝑞 <𝑖 𝑎 <𝑖 𝐸𝑚𝑏 𝑞 𝑖 ;𝑞 <𝑖 𝑎 <𝑖 :Conversational search on existing index
> contrastive
> 𝐹 θ

(a) Lin et al.                         

> <Train Time>
> <Test Time> 𝐸𝑚𝑏 𝑞 𝑖 :Normal search on existing index
> Embedding space, Unchanged
> 𝐹 θ[𝑆𝑇 ,𝑞 𝑖 ;𝑞 <𝑖 𝑎 <𝑖 ],𝑞 𝑖 ,𝐷 𝑖
> 𝑅 𝑖 =𝐿𝐿𝑀 (𝑞 𝑖 ;𝑞 <𝑖 𝑎 <𝑖 ),𝑞 𝑖 ,𝐷 𝑖 𝐺 (𝑅 𝑖 )
> 𝐹 ([𝑆𝑇 ,𝑞 𝑖 ;𝑞 <𝑖 𝑎 <𝑖 ])
> 𝐺
> 𝐹 (𝐷 𝑖 )
> 𝐺 (𝐷 𝑖 )
> <Train Time>
> <Test Time>
> 𝐹 (𝑞 𝑖 )
> 𝐺 (𝑞 𝑖 )
> 𝑆𝐿 𝑆𝐿 𝑆𝐿
> [𝑆𝑇 ,𝑞 𝑖 ;𝑞 <𝑖 𝑎 <𝑖 ]𝐸𝑚𝑏 𝑅 𝑖 :Conversational search on existing index
> 𝐹 θ
> 𝑞 𝑖

(b) Proposed RCEM                      

> 𝐺
> 𝐹 θ
> [𝑆𝑇 ,𝑞 𝑖 ;𝑞 <𝑖 𝑎 <𝑖 ]
> 𝑞 𝑖 ,𝐷 𝑖
> 𝐷 𝑖
> 𝑔𝑡
> 𝑅 𝑖
> : Original embedder frozen
> : Embedder trained from the original embedder, 𝐺 by our proposed RCEM method
> : Current 𝑖 −𝑡ℎ query, 𝑞 𝑖 and prior conversations, 𝑞 <𝑖 𝑎 <𝑖 with Special Token, ST prepended.
> : General any queries and documents
> : Groundtruth passages mapping to the conversation until 𝑖 ,𝑞 𝑖 ;𝑞 <𝑖 𝑎 <𝑖
> : Query rewriting 𝐿𝐿𝑀 (𝑞 𝑖 ;𝑞 <𝑖 𝑎 <𝑖 )results

Figure 2: RCEM overview and comparison with prior work : RCEM first precomputes embeddings using the original frozon embedder G. Specifically, it embeds the LLM-rewritten query , generated from the current query and conversation history using LLM Ri = LLM (qi; q<i a<i ), as well as general queries qi and documents Di.The a embedding model, denoted as Fθ , is then trained to map the conversational input with a special token, 

Fθ ([ ST, q i; q<i a<i ]) , to the embedding of the rewritten query embedded by the frozen embedder G(Ri) using the proposed Structure Learning (SL) loss. During training, RCEM also aligns general queries and documents with their precomputed embeddings, i.e., Fθ (qi) → G(qi) and Fθ (Di) → G(Di), to preserve the original embedding space. This design enables a single model to support both conversational search, triggered by the special token, and standard search over the existing index. It also serves as a regularizer, making the model more robust to distributional shift. In contrast, (Lin et al., 2021) trains the model to map the conversational query embedding Fθ (qi; q<i a<i ) directly to the ground-truth document G(Dgt i ), which can alter the embedding space. Unlike prior approaches, RCEM does not require conversational-query-to-ground-truth-passage mappings, which are often difficult to obtain accurately. This makes RCEM more scalable, as it reduces the need for expensive and high-quality relevance annotations 

query rewriting skill into the embedder, RCEM also attempts to preserve embedding space by mapping 

Fθ(qi) → G(qi) and Fθ(Di) → G(Di).This design offers several advantages. First, RCEM eliminates expensive LLM-based rewrit-ing during inference, substantially reducing la-tency and computational cost. Second, RCEM does not require conversational-query-to-document relevance supervision, making training more scal-able. Finally, because RCEM preserves the origi-nal embedding space, it remains compatible with existing document embeddings and prebuilt re-trieval indexes without requiring document-side re-encoding. 

4 Experiments 

Experiment setting. For our experiments, we use widely adopted conversational search bench-marks: QReCC (Anantha et al., 2021), Top-iOCQA (Adlakha et al., 2022), and TREC CAsT (Dalton et al., 2020, 2021). QReCC and TopiOCQA provide both training and test splits, while the TREC CAsT datasets are used only for evaluation under a zero-shot setting. QReCC con-tains approximately 14K conversations and 80K question–answer pairs, with retrieval performed over a large collection of about 54M passages. Top-iOCQA consists of 3.9K topic-switching conversa-tions and 51K question–answer pairs, paired with a passage corpus of roughly 25M passages. In Figure 3: In domain performance comparison : We train model using QReCC train and evaluate the perfor-mance with test data in the same domain with the same setups for fair comparison. Our proposed method out-performs Lin et al. (2021) by 3.0% in Recall@10, 2.7% in MRR, and 2.5% in NDCG@3. Note that QReCC has an index size of approximately 54M passages, and Qwen3-0.6B is used as the base embedder. 

addition, we evaluate on TREC CAsT datasets, which are designed to assess complex conversa-tional search scenarios and are commonly used for zero-shot evaluation. These datasets allow us to examine the robustness of RCEM across both in-domain and distributionally shifted conversa-tional retrieval settings. For consistent evalua-tion, we followed conventions of prior works (Lai et al., 2025a; Yang et al., 2025b; Lin et al., 2021). We report NDCG@3, MRR and Recall@10 using 

pytrec_eval (Van Gysel and de Rijke, 2018). Conversational search methods can be broadly grouped into two categories. The first follows a two-step pipeline: an LLM rewrites the conversa-tional query, and an embedder then retrieves docu-ments. Existing work improves either the rewriting model during training or the rewritten query qual-ity at test time. Although effective, these methods are costly and slow because they require an ad-ditional LLM-based rewriting step. The second category directly embeds the conversation in a sin-gle inference step, enabling efficient dense retrieval. However, these methods typically do not generate explicit query text, which limits their applicability to sparse retrieval without additional modifications. Our work belongs to this direct-embedding line. The main prior studies in this direction are Lin et al. (2021) and Yang et al. (2025b); in our ex-periments, we primarily compare against Lin et al. (2021). Unless otherwise stated, we use Qwen3-0.6B(Yang et al., 2025a) as the base embedder. For RCEM training, we added LoRA and a two-layer perceptron with SELU activation (Klambauer et al., 2017) is added on top of the base model. All mod-els are trained with a batch size of 256 on 8 H100 GPUs. RCEM uses GPT-4.1 as the LLM to gener-ate the training data with a simple query-rewriting prompt. Unlike prior methods (Lin et al., 2021; Yang et al., 2025b), RCEM does not require map-pings between conversational queries and ground-truth documents, which are often difficult to obtain with high quality. Instead, it only requires LLM-generated rewritten queries from conversational in-puts. This provides convenient and low-cost train-ing labels, enabling RCEM to scale more easily to large-scale training. 

In domain experiments. We conduct in-domain experiments using the QReCC dataset for both training and testing. For a fair comparison, we keep most settings identical, including the hardware setup, baseline model (Qwen3 0.6B), adaptation architecture, and number of training epochs. The only difference is the training objective. Notably, RCEM does not require conversation-to-ground-truth passage mappings, which are difficult to ob-tain accurately, making the training process more scalable. In contrast, Lin et al. (2021) relies on such mappings because it uses contrastive loss, limiting scalability. As shown in Figure3, our method out-performs Lin et al. (2021) by 3.0% in Recall@10, 2.7% in MRR, and 2.5% in NDCG@3. We observe that contrastive training is highly sensitive: even a small increase in the number of epochs can sub-stantially degrade performance. In contrast, our proposed method remains more stable with various epochs. 

Distributional shift experiments. In the distri-butional shift experiments,Lin et al. (2021) exhibits a pronounced overfitting issue, whereas RCEM maintains robust performance even under domain shift. Figure4 reports the results when models are trained on one dataset and evaluated on another un-der the same experimental setup for a fair compari-son. RCEM consistently outperforms the baseline across all dataset combinations and evaluation met-rics. In particular, when Lin et al. (2021) is trained on QReCC, its performance is substantially lower than that of RCEM, with gaps often ranging from 10% to 20%. This performance degradation is likely due to Figure 4: Domain shift performance comparison : We train the models on one dataset and evaluate them on another under the same experimental setup to ensure a fair comparison. The proposed RCEM method maintains strong performance under distributional shift, whereas the performance of Lin et al. (2021) drops noticeably. In particular, when trained on QReCC and tested on TREC CAsT 2020, RCEM achieves approximately 20% higher Recall@10 than Lin et al. (2021). Across all dataset combinations and evaluation metrics, RCEM consistently outperforms Lin et al. (2021). 

the contrastive objective used by Lin et al. (2021), which directly maps conversational queries to pas-sages. This task is more complex and can cause the model to overfit to the training dataset. In con-trast, RCEM maps conversational inputs to their rewritten queries, which provides a simpler learn-ing target while preserving the original embedding space. Preserving the embedding space serves as an effective regularizer, helping prevent overfitting and improving robustness to distributional shift. 

Preserving Original Embedding Space. We evaluate whether RCEM preserves the original em-bedding space. Specifically, we encode rewritten queries using RCEM and perform dense retrieval on an index built from embeddings generated by the original embedder. We then compare retrieval performance against the original embedder and the prior conversational dense retrieval method (Lin et al., 2021) on the QReCC dataset. The results show that RCEM preserves retrieval performance on the original embedding index, whereas Lin et al. (2021) degrades retrieval effectiveness due to changes in the embedding space.  

> Figure 5: Preserving Original Embedding Space:
> General query is embedded by RCEM and run retrieval on index built from the original embedding. RCEM preserves retrieval performance similar to the original embedder.

5 Conclusion 

We presented RCEM, a conversational dense re-trieval model that maps conversational inputs into the embedding space of rewritten standalone queries without explicit LLM-based rewriting dur-ing inference. Unlike prior methods that learn di-rect conversation-to-document matching, RCEM aligns conversational embeddings with rewritten-query embeddings while preserving the original embedding space. As a result, RCEM does not require expensive conversation-to-document rele-vance supervision and remains compatible with ex-isting retrieval indexes and document embeddings. Extensive experiments demonstrate that RCEM achieves strong retrieval performance and im-proved robustness under distributional shift while substantially reducing inference latency and com-putational cost. 

Limitations 

The main bottleneck of the proposed method is the LLM’s query rewriting capability. Although an embedder trained with RCEM can sometimes out-perform the two-step baseline (LLM-based query rewriting followed by embedding), likely because it learns a stronger latent representation than the explicit rewritten text, its performance still depends on the quality of query rewriting. Therefore, im-proving the LLM’s rewriting ability during training or test time, by leveraging prior rewriting meth-ods, can further enhance the performance of the RCEM-trained embedder. 

References 

Vaibhav Adlakha, Shehzaad Dhuliawala, Kaheer Sule-man, Harm de Vries, and Siva Reddy. 2022. Top-iOCQA: Open-domain conversational question an-swering with topic switching. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics , 10:468– 483. Raviteja Anantha, Svitlana Vakulenko, Zhucheng Tu, Shayne Longpre, Stephen Pulman, and Srinivas Chappidi. 2021. Open-domain question answering goes conversational via question rewriting. In Pro-ceedings of the 2021 Conference of the North Amer-ican Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies , pages 520–534, Online. Association for Computational Lin-guistics. Yiruo Cheng, Kelong Mao, and Zhicheng Dou. 2024. In-terpreting conversational dense retrieval by rewriting-enhanced inversion of session embedding. In Pro-ceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Associa-tion for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 2879–2893, Bangkok, Thailand. As-sociation for Computational Linguistics. Jeffrey Dalton, Chenyan Xiong, and Jamie Callan. 2020. Cast 2019: The conversational assistance track overview. In In Proceedings of TREC .Jeffrey Dalton, Chenyan Xiong, and Jamie Callan. 2021. Cast 2020: The conversational assistance track overview. In In Proceedings of TREC .Günter Klambauer, Thomas Unterthiner, Andreas Mayr, and Sepp Hochreiter. 2017. Self-normalizing neural networks. Advances in neural information process-ing systems , 30. Yilong Lai, Jialong Wu, Zhenglin Wang, and Deyu Zhou. 2025a. AdaRewriter: Unleashing the power of prompting-based conversational query reformulation via test-time adaptation. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-guage Processing , pages 3889–3905, Suzhou, China. Association for Computational Linguistics. Yilong Lai, Jialong Wu, Congzhi Zhang, Haowen Sun, and Deyu Zhou. 2025b. Adacqr: Enhancing query reformulation for conversational search via sparse and dense retrieval alignment. In Proceedings of the 31st International Conference on Computational Linguistics , pages 7698–7720, Abu Dhabi, UAE. As-sociation for Computational Linguistics. Sheng-Chieh Lin, Jheng-Hong Yang, and Jimmy Lin. 2021. Contextualized query embeddings for conver-sational search. In Proceedings of the 2021 Confer-ence on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Pro-cessing , pages 1004–1015, Online and Punta Cana, Dominican Republic. Association for Computational Linguistics. Kelong Mao, Chenlong Deng, Haonan Chen, Fengran Mo, Zheng Liu, Tetsuya Sakai, and Zhicheng Dou. 2024. Chatretriever: Adapting large language mod-els for generalized and robust conversational dense retrieval. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing ,pages 1227–1240, Miami, Florida, USA. Association for Computational Linguistics. Kelong Mao, Zhicheng Dou, Bang Liu, Hongjin Qian, Fengran Mo, Xiangli Wu, Xiaohua Cheng, and Zhao Cao. 2023a. Search-oriented conversational query editing. In Findings of the Association for Compu-tational Linguistics: ACL 2023 , pages 4160–4172, Toronto, Canada. Association for Computational Lin-guistics. Kelong Mao, Zhicheng Dou, Fengran Mo, Jiewen Hou, Haonan Chen, and Hongjin Qian. 2023b. Large lan-guage models know your contextual search intent: A prompting framework for conversational search. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2023 , pages 1211–1225. Asso-ciation for Computational Linguistics. Fengran Mo, Abbas Ghaddar, Kelong Mao, Mehdi Reza-gholizadeh, Boxing Chen, Qun Liu, and Jian-Yun Nie. 2024a. Chiq: Contextual history enhancement for improving query rewriting in conversational search. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empiri-cal Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 2253–2268, Miami, Florida, USA. Association for Computational Linguistics. Fengran Mo, Kelong Mao, Yutao Zhu, Yihong Wu, Kaiyu Huang, and Jian-Yun Nie. 2023. Convgqr: Generative query reformulation for conversational search. In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Vol-ume 1: Long Papers) , pages 4998–5012, Toronto, Canada. Association for Computational Linguistics. Fengran Mo, Chen Qu, Kelong Mao, Tianyu Zhu, Zhan Su, Kaiyu Huang, and Jian-Yun Nie. 2024b. History-aware conversational dense retrieval. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2024 , pages 13366–13378, Bangkok, Thailand. As-sociation for Computational Linguistics. Christophe Van Gysel and Maarten de Rijke. 2018. Pytrec_eval: An extremely fast python interface to trec_eval. In The 41st International ACM SIGIR Con-ference on Research & Development in Information Retrieval , pages 873–876. An Yang, Anfeng Li, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chang Gao, Chengen Huang, Chenxu Lv, et al. 2025a. Qwen3 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.09388 .Seunghan Yang, Juntae Lee, Jihwan Bang, Kyuhong Shim, Minsoo Kim, and Simyung Chang. 2025b. Learning contextual retrieval for robust conversa-tional search. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-ing , pages 11991–12003, Suzhou, China. Association for Computational Linguistics. Fanghua Ye, Meng Fang, Shenghui Li, and Emine Yil-maz. 2023. Enhancing conversational search: Large language model-aided informative query rewriting. In Findings of the Association for Computational Lin-guistics: EMNLP 2023 , pages 5985–6006, Singapore. Association for Computational Linguistics. 

A Prompts 

We use a simple prompt to convert each conversa-tional query into a rewritten query for generating the training dataset, as shown below: 

Given the recent conversation: {conversation_history} Rewrite the following ambiguous query into a self-contained and more clear query. This is the ambiguous query: {query} 

RCEM could potentially achieve even better performance by incorporating improved prompts or advanced query rewriting methods from prior work (Lai et al., 2025a).