Beyond Chunk-Local Extraction: Cross-Chunk Graph Augmentation for
GraphRAG
Jiaming Zhang1, Yibo Zhao1, Jing Yu1,
Jianxiang Yu1, Xiang Li1*
1School of Data Science and Engineering, East China Normal University
Abstract
GraphRAG extends retrieval-augmented gener-
ation by organizing corpora as explicit knowl-
edge graphs, enabling graph-based retrieval for
complex question answering. However, exist-
ing frameworks extract entities and relations
within individual chunks, leaving cross-chunk
relations—those whose evidence spans multi-
ple passages—systematically absent from the
index. Exhaustive LLM-based recovery of such
relations is impractical due to the combina-
torial explosion of chunk combinations. We
present CROSSAUG, a GNN-guided CROSS-
Chunk Graph AUGmentation method that en-
riches GraphRAG indices with cross-chunk
relational structure as an offline step before
query-time retrieval. CROSSAUG derives train-
ing supervision through self-supervised graph
corruption, uses a topology-aware GNN to
score subgraphs for missingness, and applies
evidence-grounded LLM completion only to
selected high-scoring regions.
Experiments
on three LLM-based GraphRAG frameworks
across four multi-hop and long-document QA
benchmarks demonstrate that CROSSAUG con-
sistently improves performance, confirming
the benefit of cross-chunk graph augmentation
for retrieval-based question answering. Our
code is available at https://github.com/
DonFinliani/CrossAug.
1
Introduction
Retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) is widely
used in processing long documents, where docu-
ments are typically chunked into smaller segments
for retrieval and generation. Recent GraphRAG
frameworks extend this paradigm by organizing
the corpus as an explicit graph in which entities are
extracted from text and linked via relation triples,
enabling graph algorithms and community summa-
rization to support multi-hop retrieval and corpus-
level queries (Edge et al., 2024; Gutiérrez et al.,
*Corresponding author: xiangli@dase.ecnu.edu.cn
2024). This direction has shown particular promise
for long texts and complex QA, where flat vector
retrieval frequently surfaces superficially relevant
information while missing the critical evidence re-
quired for complex question answering.
However, the conventional chunk-based con-
struction of GraphRAG introduces a fundamental
blind spot. Existing frameworks typically extract
entities and relations within individual chunks, im-
plicitly assuming that document-level relational
structure can be recovered by stitching together
locally extracted triples. This assumption is frag-
ile for long texts, where many important relations,
such as alias resolution and causal chains, depend
on evidence distributed across multiple chunks. For
example, when HippoRAG2 (Gutiérrez et al., 2025)
constructs a graph index for Voodoo Planet, the re-
sulting graph contains locally correct triples such
as (Tau, approached, Lumbrilo) and (Tau, defeated,
Lumbrilo), but these can only form an event chain
around Tau and Lumbrilo without specifying where
the confrontation takes place, causing the frame-
work to answer incorrectly. The cross-chunk loca-
tive relation (Khatkan swamp, location of, final con-
frontation with Lumbrilo) can only be recovered by
jointly reading the chunk that describes the swamp
with those describing the battle, which a chunk-
local extractor has no access to. Community sum-
marization solves corpus-level queries but cannot
recover such precise cross-chunk relational facts
and can even discard relational details rather than
preserving them (Han et al., 2025). A GraphRAG
index may thus contain many locally correct edges
while still missing the hidden cross-chunk relations
required for long-document reasoning.
Most existing GraphRAG methods focus on im-
proving how an already constructed graph is used
for retrieval, ranking, summarization, or multi-hop
reasoning; if the graph is incomplete at construc-
tion time, however, downstream algorithms can
only operate over a partial structure (Yang et al.,
arXiv:2605.28004v1  [cs.CL]  27 May 2026


2026). While LLMs could in principle recover
missing cross-chunk relations, applying them ex-
haustively is impractical due to the combinatorial
explosion of chunk combinations. We therefore
introduce graph neural networks (GNNs) into the
GraphRAG pipeline as a structural guide: by com-
bining semantic node features with relational graph
structure through edge-type-aware message pass-
ing (Gilmer et al., 2017; Schlichtkrull et al., 2018),
a GNN can identify structural patterns character-
istic of chunk-local extraction failures and locate
where evidence-grounded LLM completion is most
likely to recover useful relational structure.
In this paper, we introduce CROSSAUG, a GNN-
guided CROSS-Chunk Graph AUGmentation
method for GraphRAG. CROSSAUG is built around
three design principles. First, a self-supervised
graph corruption module creates training data by
corrupting the base graph itself—masking fact
edges and deleting entity nodes—to match the in-
completeness patterns introduced by chunk-local
extraction. Second, a topology-aware GNN scoring
module learns to assign missingness scores to local
subgraphs, turning cross-chunk discovery from ex-
haustive entity enumeration into a targeted extrac-
tion problem with a budget hyperparameter. Third,
a GNN-guided LLM completion module applies
the LLM only to selected, evidence-grounded sub-
graphs and persists validated extracted triples back
into the graph index. In this way, the additional
reasoning cost is paid once during offline augmen-
tation, while the enriched relational structure can
be reused by any downstream retrieval pipeline.
Finally, our contributions are threefold:
• We identify GraphRAG’s chunk-local extrac-
tion bottleneck and formulate it as cross-
chunk relation/entity recovery.
• We propose a self-supervised GNN scoring
framework that reframes cross-chunk discov-
ery as subgraph-level missingness detection,
replacing intractable enumeration with tar-
geted and topology-guided selection.
• We present a GNN–LLM collaboration
pipeline that yields consistent performance
improvements across three GraphRAG frame-
works and four QA benchmarks.
2
Related Work
GraphRAG has recently gained increasing attention
in the research community. MS-GraphRAG (Edge
et al., 2024) is among the first GraphRAG frame-
works to build a knowledge graph index directly
from raw text for corpus-level question answering.
Its pipeline demonstrates strong improvements over
flat vector retrieval for broad queries, though graph
construction requires substantial LLM inference.
Recent GraphRAG frameworks can be broadly
grouped by how they construct the indexing graph.
One line of work uses LLMs or OpenIE-style ex-
traction to build semantic graphs with explicit enti-
ties and relations. HippoRAG and HippoRAG2 ex-
tract entities and (subject, predicate, object) triples
from each chunk to build schema-free knowledge
graphs, and then apply Personalized PageRank over
entity, fact, and passage nodes to support asso-
ciative multi-hop retrieval (Gutiérrez et al., 2024,
2025). LightRAG constructs a graph-enhanced in-
dex with entity and relation descriptions and com-
bines low-level and high-level retrieval to improve
both local factual access and broader contextual
retrieval (Guo et al., 2024). GFM-RAG extends
this line by training a general GNN over the ex-
tracted graph to enable topology-aware retrieval
beyond similarity-based ranking (Luo et al., 2026).
A second line of work reduces indexing cost by
avoiding heavy LLM relation extraction. For exam-
ple, LinearRAG builds a relation-free hierarchical
index with lightweight entity extraction and seman-
tic linking, avoiding explicit relation-triple gen-
eration during graph construction (Zhuang et al.,
2025). E2GraphRAG similarly focuses on effi-
cient index construction with NLP-tool-based en-
tity graphs and bidirectional entity–chunk links,
with summaries used only as lightweight retrieval
support (Zhao et al., 2025). These lightweight
frameworks trade explicit semantic relation mod-
eling for lower construction cost and higher scal-
ability. Despite their different cost–quality trade-
offs, both families construct graphs primarily from
chunk-local evidence: LLM-based frameworks usu-
ally extract triples within individual chunks, while
lightweight frameworks rely on local entity men-
tions, co-occurrence, or chunk-level indexes. As a
result, neither family directly addresses relations
that can only be recovered by jointly reading evi-
dence distributed across multiple chunks.
3
Method
3.1
Overview
Given a long document collection, a standard
GraphRAG pipeline splits the text into chunks, ex-
tracts entities and triples, and builds a graph index


1.Build Base Graph
Documents
Chunk 
Basic Graph G
Standard GraphRAG Indexing
Extract
(Entities & Triples)
Each triple retains 
provenance links to source chunks.
triple -> chunk provenance
2.CrossAug Offline Augmentation
2.Score with GNN
3.Rank & Select
4.Assemble Context
5.LLM Complete
6.Validate & Insert
1.Corrupt
Subgraph for inference
Subgraph for training
Weighted random
walks from root entity 
over entity–entity edges
(fact favored, synonym allowed)
inact y=0
corrupted y=1
inact y=0
corrupted y=1
Encode
Message Passing
Score
(missingness)
Inference
Training
GNN
Message Passing
Graph Pooling
MLP
BCE Loss
New entities/triples
Propose missing entities/triples 
with supporting chunks
Base Graph G
Augmented Graph G+
Root entity
Entity node
Chunk
Known edge
New edge
Masked edge
Removed entity
New entity
Root entity
Entity node
Masked edge
Removed entity
Known edge
Expanded edge
Expanded entity
New entity
New edge
3.Downstream Use
 Build evidence-grounded context
for each selected subgraph
Validater & filter
Keep evidence-grounded 
triples only
Retrieve on 
Augmented Graph G+ 
Generate Answer
No GNN or Completion 
at Query Time 
Rank candidates, prune overlap
keep diverse top-K 
Rank by m(S) 
(high->low)
m(S)>θ
Candidates 
subgraphs
User Query
Insert into Graph
Figure 1: Overview of the CROSSAUG workflow. GNN-based missingness scoring selects incomplete subgraphs,
and LLM completion extracts evidence-grounded triples before augmenting the graph index.
G = (V, E) for retrieval. Nodes include entity,
passage, and auxiliary nodes; edges include fact
edges from extracted triples, synonym edges, and
entity–chunk edges. Although this graph supports
graph-based retrieval, it remains incomplete be-
cause chunk-local extraction can miss both entities
and fact edges. The goal of CROSSAUG is to dis-
cover missing entities and hidden triples that are
supported by the original text but absent from the
graph, especially when their evidence is distributed
across multiple chunks.
CROSSAUG is applied as an offline augmenta-
tion step after the base graph has been constructed
by the GraphRAG pipeline.
It does not mod-
ify the query-time retrieval or generation compo-
nents; instead, it enriches the graph index once
before any downstream use. CROSSAUG operates
through a three-module pipeline. First, the self-
supervised graph corruption module builds train-
ing data from the existing graph itself. It samples
local entity-centered subgraphs and constructs in-
complete views by masking fact edges or deleting
entity nodes. This converts the absence of manually
labeled missing triples into a self-supervised miss-
ingness detection task. Second, the topology-aware
GNN scoring module learns to assign a missing-
ness score to a sampled subgraph. The GNN does
not predict a particular missing edge; instead, it
estimates whether the local topology looks incom-
plete, which is better aligned with the goal of de-
ciding where the LLM should spend effort. Third,
the GNN-guided LLM completion module sends
only high-scoring and low-overlap subgraphs to
the LLM together with evidence chunks and known
triples. The LLM produces new evidence-grounded
triples, and the validated triples are inserted back
into the GraphRAG index. In this way, CROSSAUG
separates structural search from semantic comple-
tion: the GNN provides a cheap global filter over
many candidate regions, while the LLM performs
expensive extraction only on selected contexts.
3.2
Self-Supervised Graph Corruption
Heterogeneous
graph
construction.
CROSSAUG
is
designed
for
the
common
family of GraphRAG frameworks that construct
a graph from LLM-extracted triples.
Such
frameworks usually produce an entity-centric
graph: entities are represented as nodes, extracted
triples induce semantic relation edges between
entities, and each relation is associated with its
source chunk as textual provenance. CROSSAUG
therefore assumes a minimal graph interface rather
than a framework-specific schema: the base index


should provide entity nodes, relation-bearing
edges, and a way to trace extracted facts back to
evidence chunks. Each node v ∈V is assigned
a semantic feature xv from the existing retrieval
index when available. When the base graph stores
edge weights, CROSSAUG uses the raw weight
we as an edge-strength signal, such as the number
of extracted triples supporting a fact edge or
the similarity score of an alias/synonym edge;
otherwise, unweighted fact edges are assigned a
default weight of 1. Each edge is also assigned
a relation type ψ(e) that distinguishes semantic
fact edges from auxiliary structural edges. This
abstraction makes the method applicable to
LLM-based GraphRAG indices beyond a specific
GraphRAG implementation.
Weighted random-walk sampling.
Since the
full graph can be large, CROSSAUG does not enu-
merate all entity pairs or chunk pairs. Instead, it
samples local entity subgraphs around root enti-
ties. A root entity is eligible if it is an entity node,
is not filtered out for its uninformative content
(e.g., purely numeric strings), and has at least one
neighboring entity through a fact or synonym edge.
From each root r, CROSSAUG launches multiple
weighted random walks over entity–entity edges.
Let e = (u, v) be a fact or synonym edge with raw
graph weight we. The transition weight used for
sampling is:
˜we = min(we, c) · αψ(e),
where c clips very large edge weights and αψ(e)
is an edge-type multiplier. In our implementation,
fact edges receive a larger multiplier than synonym
edges, so walks prefer semantically informative
factual connections while still allowing alias or
synonym expansion. The transition probability is
then calculated by:
P(v | u) = ˜w(u,v)/
X
z∈N(u)
˜w(u,z).
The walk length is measured in entity hops, and
chunk nodes are not traversed during sampling. Ev-
idence chunks are collected later from the prove-
nance of fact edges. This choice keeps the sampled
region focused on entity-level relational structure
and prevents early expansion into broad passage
neighborhoods.
The sampled node set defines a local subgraph
Sr = (Vr, Er). CROSSAUG retains only subgraphs
with at least a minimum number of nodes and at
least one fact edge. This filtering removes degener-
ate samples with little training signal and ensures
that each retained subgraph has sufficient relational
structure for corruption and LLM completion.
Corruption as missingness supervision.
Man-
ually annotating which triples are missing from a
long-document graph is expensive. Our method
therefore derives training supervision through self-
supervised learning. Note that at both training and
inference time, a candidate subgraph sampled from
a root entity is fed directly to the GNN for miss-
ingness scoring. During training, the sampled sub-
graph serves as the base for constructing corrupted
positive examples (y = 1) by applying two cor-
ruption operators (details will be described below).
The intact negative examples (y = 0), however, are
obtained by more extensively exploring the local
neighborhood around the same root entity, yield-
ing comparatively richer and larger subgraphs than
those sampled at inference time. This design en-
sures that the GNN learns to distinguish structurally
incomplete regions, rather than acquiring an inci-
dental association between subgraph density and
the missingness label.
Two corruption operators are used. The first
operator masks fact edges. Given the fact-edge
set Efact
r
, CROSSAUG removes a random subset
Me ⊂Efact
r
with ratio ρe, while preserving at
least the required minimum number of fact edges.
This simulates the common failure mode where
an extractor recognizes the relevant entities but
misses one or more relations. The second operator
deletes entity nodes. It selects eligible non-root
entity nodes that participate in at least one fact
edge and removes a subset Mv with ratio ρv, pro-
vided that the remaining graph still contains enough
fact edges. This simulates a stronger failure mode
where the graph misses an entity along with its
related relations.
These two corruptions correspond to the two
main types of incompleteness that appear in
GraphRAG: missing relation edges and missing
entity nodes. The corruption task is intentionally
defined at the subgraph level rather than the edge
level. A hidden cross-chunk fact such as alias or
causal chain requires region-level relational context
rather than a single isolated entity pair. By asking
the model to detect whether a local region is incom-
plete, CROSSAUG learns a retrieval-control signal:
which graph regions deserve LLM completion.


3.3
Topology-Aware GNN Missingness
Scoring
GNN encoder.
For every sampled subgraph view,
CROSSAUG constructs a heterogeneous graph rep-
resentation for message passing with node features,
typed edges, and node-type identifiers. Let xv
denote the input semantic feature vector of node
v, and let Wx be a learned projection matrix that
maps input features into the GNN hidden space. In
CROSSAUG, the textual content of entity nodes and
chunk nodes is encoded by the same embedding
model. Therefore, although the sampled graph con-
tains different node types, their features lie in the
same vector space and have the same dimensional-
ity, allowing them to share the same projection ma-
trix Wx. The missingness detector initializes each
node representation by combining this projected
feature with a learned embedding of the node type:
h(0)
v
= Wxxv + eϕ(v).
The node representations are then updated through
two layers of message passing.
For relational
GNNs, the update uses edge-type-specific trans-
formations:
h(ℓ+1)
v
= σ

X
τ
X
u∈Nτ(v)
W (ℓ)
τ h(ℓ)
u

,
where ℓdenotes the message-passing layer, τ
ranges over edge types, Nτ(v) denotes the neigh-
bors of node v connected by edges of type τ, u is a
neighboring node in this typed neighborhood, W (ℓ)
τ
is the layer-specific transformation matrix for edge
type τ, and σ(·) is a nonlinear activation function.
Graph-level missingness prediction.
After mes-
sage passing, CROSSAUG aggregates the node
representations into a single subgraph representa-
tion. Since graph nodes have no fixed order, we
use order-invariant pooling operations. Following
common graph-level pooling practice, we concate-
nate global mean pooling and global max pooling
(Wang et al., 2024):
g(S) = [meanv∈Shv; maxv∈Shv] .
Mean pooling summarizes the overall distribution
of node representations in the sampled subgraph,
while max pooling preserves the strongest local
activation. Their concatenation therefore captures
both the global subgraph context and localized evi-
dence of incompleteness.
A multilayer classifier maps g(S) to a logit a(S),
and the missingness score is m(S) = σ(a(S)),
where σ(·) denotes the sigmoid function.The model
is trained with binary cross-entropy. Intact sam-
pled views are treated as negative examples and
corrupted views as positive examples.
LBCE = −y log m(S) −(1 −y) log(1 −m(S)).
Dynamic training and inference selection.
At
each training epoch, CROSSAUG re-samples a fixed
number of root entities and constructs fresh in-
tact/corrupted training groups. This dynamic sam-
pling exposes the GNN to different local neighbor-
hoods and different corruption patterns, reducing
overfitting to a static set of artificial examples.
At inference time, the trained GNN scores each
sampled subgraph, and candidates are ranked by
m(S). A subgraph is eligible for LLM comple-
tion only if its score exceeds a threshold θ. Can-
didates with high node-level overlap with already-
selected subgraphs—measured by Jaccard similar-
ity J(Si, Sj) = |Vi ∩Vj|/|Vi ∪Vj|—are skipped
to avoid redundant LLM calls on nearly identical
evidence. Selection continues until the LLM call
budget B is exhausted. The GNN module thereby
transforms the problem from exhaustive enumera-
tion of all possible cross-chunk combinations into
targeted selection of a diverse, high-missingness
subgraph set, improving cost efficiency by direct-
ing LLM completion toward contexts where it is
most likely to recover useful relational information.
3.4
GNN-Guided LLM Completion and
Graph Augmentation
For each selected subgraph, CROSSAUG assembles
a context that includes the subgraph’s root entity,
the full list of entities in the local region, all al-
ready extracted triples, and the evidence passages
retrieved from the provenance of participating fact
edges. The GNN is used to identify regions that are
likely to be incomplete, while the LLM performs
completion based on the actual entities, triples, and
evidence passages in those regions.
The LLM is instructed to propose new entities
and relations that are directly stated or unambigu-
ously supported by the provided passages. Every
proposed entity and relation must include a list of
supporting chunk identifiers drawn from the evi-
dence set; this citation requirement enforces cross-
chunk grounding and prevents hallucinated graph
expansion. Relations without valid chunk citations


are discarded. The validated triples are then in-
serted into the base graph index using the same
schema as the original extractor, so the augmented
graph is structurally consistent with the base and
immediately compatible with any downstream re-
trieval pipeline. Because all augmentation is per-
formed offline, the enriched graph serves as a static
index for subsequent retrieval and question answer-
ing; neither the LLM completion step nor the GNN
need to be re-invoked at query time.
4
Experiments
Due to space limitations, we defer additional results
to the Appendix, including Cost and Efficiency
Analysis (Appendix C) and Hyperparameter Sensi-
tivity Analysis (Appendix D).
4.1
Experimental Settings
Datasets and Baselines
We evaluate our method
on four benchmarks: three widely used multi-
hop QA benchmarks—MusiQue (Trivedi et al.,
2022), 2WikiMultiHopQA (Ho et al., 2020),
and HotpotQA (Yang et al., 2018)—and Liter-
aryQA (Bonomo et al., 2025), a long-document
QA benchmark over literary texts. Following previ-
ous work (Gutiérrez et al., 2024), we sample 1,000
questions from each multi-hop benchmark to con-
trol experimental cost. For LiteraryQA, we use the
first 50 books from the test set, comprising 1,358
queries in total; most books in this set exceed the
context window of the base model. Detailed dataset
statistics are shown in Table 1.
Statistic
LiteraryQA MuSiQue
2Wiki HotpotQA
Chunks
9,550
11,656
6,119
9,811
Base nodes
68,014
104,190
54,487
84,632
Base edges
225,908
331,233 169,455
262,256
Base triples
103,148
123,308
64,523
98,592
Added nodes
3,203
2,994
1,569
1,718
Added edges
27,284
20,093
9,781
9,839
Added triples
8,707
8,901
5,048
5,252
Table 1: Dataset-level graph statistics for the base
GraphRAG index and the CROSSAUG-augmented index.
“2Wiki” denotes 2WikiMultiHopQA and “HotpotQA”
denotes HotpotQA.
We apply CROSSAUG to three GraphRAG frame-
works that construct their graphs through LLM-
based extraction: LightRAG (Guo et al., 2024),
HippoRAG2 (Gutiérrez et al., 2024), and GFM-
RAG (Luo et al., 2026). For each, we compare the
original base framework against its CROSSAUG-
augmented variant. We additionally include Lin-
earRAG (Zhuang et al., 2025), a non-LLM-based
baseline, for broader context; CROSSAUG is not
applied to LinearRAG, as its graph construction
does not rely on LLM extraction.
Base Models
We adopt Qwen3-32B (Yang et al.,
2025) as the backbone LLM; its 32,768-token con-
text window provides sufficient capacity for the
long evidence passages retrieved across our bench-
marks. BGE-M3 (Chen et al., 2024) serves as the
embedding model, and BAAI-bge-reranker-v2-m3
is used as the reranker where applicable. We set
k=5 for top-k retrieval across all frameworks.
Metrics
We evaluate using Exact Match (EM)
and F1 scores, which are widely used metrics in
QA research (Gutiérrez et al., 2024; Guo et al.,
2024; Luo et al., 2026).
4.2
Experimental Results
Table 2 shows that CROSSAUG improves perfor-
mance across all three base frameworks, show-
ing that the proposed graph augmentation is
framework-agnostic. Gains are most pronounced
on MuSiQue and LiteraryQA, where cross-chunk
evidence plays a more prominent role. In particular,
HippoRAG2+CROSSAUG achieves F1 improve-
ments of +1.33 and +1.09 on these two bench-
marks, respectively. Among all the results, Lin-
earRAG achieves the highest F1 score (65.16) on
2WikiMultiHopQA despite using no LLM extrac-
tion, but falls behind HippoRAG2+CROSSAUG,
which achieves the overall best performance, on
the remaining three benchmarks.
Fine-grained Retrieval Analysis.
We further ex-
amine the fine-grained effects of CROSSAUG on
downstream retrieval and QA through false-to-true
(F2T) cases, where the base framework fails but
the CROSSAUG-augmented variant succeeds. As
shown in Figure 2, these gains mainly arise from
two retrieval effects. Chunk order change keeps
the retrieved chunk set unchanged but ranks more
useful evidence higher, increasing its LLM atten-
tion. Chunk set change alters the retrieved evi-
dence by introducing either gold chunks into the
top-k or non-gold bridging chunks that still sup-
port the reasoning chain. In LightRAG, retrieved
facts are directly inserted into the QA prompt, so
CROSSAUG-extracted hidden facts can also pro-
vide compact relational evidence, accounting for
many F2T improvements. To assess whether these
changes also produce harmful effects, we jointly


Framework
Setting
MuSiQue
2Wiki
HotpotQA
LiteraryQA
EM
F1
EM
F1
EM
F1
EM
F1
LinearRAG
–
24.10
37.23
47.90
65.16
47.00
64.59
11.56
26.57
LightRAG
Base
20.50
28.09
28.40
36.93
44.90
58.60
11.26
26.24
CROSSAUG
21.40
29.24
29.30
37.34
44.90
58.50
11.63
26.82
GFM-RAG
Base
20.30
30.61
52.90
60.43
40.50
50.42
12.59
27.49
CROSSAUG
20.40
30.96
53.20
60.44
40.30
50.82
14.58
28.83
HippoRAG2
Base
27.90
39.95
51.20
57.53
53.80
68.03
17.59
32.72
CROSSAUG
29.30
41.28
51.90
58.15
54.10
68.44
18.40
33.81
Table 2: Main results on multi-hop and long-document question answering benchmarks. Bold values indicate the
best result in each metric column.
M
2W
H
LQ
M
2W
H
LQ
M
2W
H
LQ
0
20
40
60
54
47
45
30
41
20
25
17
19
6
16
25
GFM-RAG
LightRAG
HippoRAG2
False-to-True Cases (EM)
Order-only
Set-only
New gold in top-k
Hidden facts in QA
Other F2T
Figure 2: False-to-true EM case breakdown across three
GraphRAG frameworks. Bars are stacked by retrieval
effect; M (MuSiQue), 2W (2Wiki), H (HotpotQA), and
LQ (LiteraryQA) denote the corresponding datasets.
M 2W H LQ M 2W H LQ M 2W H LQ M 2W H LQ
−40
−20
0
20
40
HippoRAG2
chunk
LightRAG
chunk
LightRAG
facts
GFM-RAG
chunk
Cases (EM)
False-to-True
True-to-False
Figure 3: Bidirectional EM effect of retrieval changes.
Upward bars show F2T cases, while downward bars show
T2F cases, grouped by framework and change source.
examine F2T and true-to-false (T2F) cases caused
by chunk changes and by hidden facts in the QA
context. As shown in Figure 3, F2T counts con-
sistently and substantially exceed the correspond-
ing T2F counts across all frameworks and bench-
marks. This confirms that the retrieval changes
introduced by CROSSAUG are predominantly bene-
ficial, primarily surfacing missing cross-chunk evi-
dence rather than introducing misleading retrievals.
4.3
Case Study
We
present
representative
cases
illustrating
CROSSAUG’s advantages in retrieval and down-
stream QA. We focus on a cross-chunk locative
case where CROSSAUG recovers a relation unavail-
able from chunk-local triples alone, with additional
cases in Appendix B.
Recovering a cross-chunk locative relation.
In
Voodoo Planet, the question asks: “Where does
the confrontation between the Medic and Lum-
brilo take place?” The gold answer is in a deadly
swamp. The base framework answers “on a camp-
ing ground”, whereas CROSSAUG answers that
the confrontation occurs in the Khatkan poachers’
camp within a swamp. The base graph contains
locally correct triples such as (Tau, approached,
Lumbrilo), (Tau, defeated, Lumbrilo), (Lumbrilo,
practices, new magic), and (Voodoo Planet, fea-
tures, showdown between Lumbrilo and Asaki).
However, these triples only indicate that Tau and
Lumbrilo are involved in a conflict; even when con-
nected through multi-hop reasoning, these triples
trace an event chain centering on Tau and Lum-
brilo’s conflict without specifying where the con-
frontation takes place. The base framework conse-
quently forms an answer from incomplete context
and misidentifies the location.
CROSSAUG extracts cross-chunk locative facts


that directly connect the confrontation to the miss-
ing location, including (khatkan swamp, location
of battle, lumbrilo vs tau and dane) and (khatkan
swamp, location of, final confrontation with lum-
brilo). These facts are supported by the chunk that
describes the swamp and camp together with the
chunks that describe the battle itself. By adding
these cross-chunk locative links to the graph index,
CROSSAUG causes retrieval to surface the relevant
swamp and confrontation passages:
“The shadow thing in the swamp moved ... ‘I’d
rather get at the source.’ There was a grim note in
the Medic’s reply. ‘And to do that I want to look
at their camp.”’
This case illustrates the core failure mode tar-
geted by CROSSAUG: the base graph contains
true local event triples, but the cross-chunk rela-
tion needed to answer the question is absent from
the index.
4.4
Validation of Augmented Triple Quality
Criterion
DeepSeek Rate
Human–LLM F1
Cohen’s κ
Factual correctness
84.35
0.940
0.765
Chunk ID correctness
81.54
0.899
0.781
Table 3: Validation results for the DeepSeek judge on
generated triples. DeepSeek correct rates are computed
over parseable judge outputs, while Human–LLM F1
and Cohen’s κ are computed on the 100 manually anno-
tated agreement samples.
To validate the quality of triples produced by
CROSSAUG, we randomly sample 1,000 aug-
mented triples from each of the four datasets under
the HippoRAG2+CROSSAUG setting and evalu-
ate them using DeepSeek-V4-Pro as an automatic
judge. Each triple is assessed on two criteria: fac-
tual correctness (whether the relation is accurate
given the source document) and chunk citation ac-
curacy (whether the cited chunk indeed supports
the triple). To verify the reliability of this automatic
evaluation, we further randomly sample 100 triples
for human annotation on the same two criteria. We
compute Human–LLM F1 and Cohen’s κ between
human and automatic judgments to measure inter-
rater agreement. Table 3 reports the results. The
DeepSeek judge assigns high correct rates to both
factual correctness (84.35%) and chunk citation
accuracy (81.54%), indicating that the augmented
triples are predominantly accurate and grounded
in the cited evidence. The strong Human–LLM F1
scores (0.940 and 0.899) and substantial Cohen’s
κ values (0.765 and 0.781) further confirm that the
automatic evaluation closely mirrors human judg-
ment, validating both the quality of CROSSAUG-
extracted triples and the reliability of the automatic
judge.
4.5
Ablation Study
Dataset
Setting
EM
F1
MuSiQue
CROSSAUG
29.30
41.28
w/o GNN
28.40
39.95
2Wiki
CROSSAUG
51.90
58.15
w/o GNN
50.90
57.52
HotpotQA
CROSSAUG
54.10
68.44
w/o GNN
53.30
67.66
LiteraryQA
CROSSAUG
18.40
33.81
w/o GNN
18.19
33.17
Table 4: Ablation study on the GNN scorer in Hip-
poRAG2. The w/o GNN setting replaces CROSSAUG’s
scorer-selected subgraphs with the same number of ran-
domly selected subgraphs for LLM completion.
To assess the GNN scorer, we replace it with
random subgraph selection under the same LLM
completion budget, isolating the effect of subgraph
selection quality. As shown in Table 4, this replace-
ment degrades performance on all four benchmarks,
especially MuSiQue (F1: −1.33; EM: −0.90) and
2WikiMultiHopQA (EM: −1.00). These results
show that topology-guided scoring improves sub-
graph selection and is effective in CROSSAUG.
5
Conclusion
We present CROSSAUG, a GNN-guided graph
completion method that addresses the chunk-local
extraction bottleneck in GraphRAG. CROSSAUG
operates through three coordinated modules: a
self-supervised graph corruption module that de-
rives training supervision directly from the base
graph without manual annotation; a topology-
aware GNN scoring module that identifies struc-
turally incomplete subgraphs; and a GNN-guided
LLM completion module that produces evidence-
grounded triples for the selected regions. Applied
to three LLM-based GraphRAG frameworks across
four QA benchmarks, CROSSAUG consistently im-
proves performance.
By restricting LLM com-
pletion to a targeted subset of high-missingness
subgraphs, CROSSAUG produces a persistent aug-
mented graph that can be reused by any down-
stream retrieval pipeline without further recompu-
tation.


Limitations
CROSSAUG introduces additional indexing cost
primarily through prompt tokens, as each LLM
completion call is supplied with a local subgraph,
multiple evidence passages, and known triples. As
discussed in Appendix C, the GNN scorer limits
LLM completion to a small subset of selected sub-
graphs, keeping the additional call count and wall-
clock time to modest fractions of the base pipeline
overhead. The overall additional cost is therefore
controllable through the GNN scoring threshold
and LLM budget parameters. Nevertheless, the
prompt overhead per call is substantial by design,
and future work could explore more efficient con-
text compression or selective evidence retrieval
strategies to further reduce this cost without sacri-
ficing completion quality.
Ethical considerations
CROSSAUG augments GraphRAG indices with
LLM-generated triples;
despite our citation-
grounding filter and the validation rates above
81% reported in Section 4.4, residual extraction
errors may propagate to downstream QA, and prac-
titioners should verify the augmented triples in
high-stakes settings. All four English QA bench-
marks (MusiQue, 2WikiMultiHopQA, HotpotQA,
LiteraryQA) and all models used (Qwen3-32B,
BGE-M3, BAAI-bge-reranker-v2-m3, DeepSeek-
V4-Pro) are publicly released for research and are
used in a manner consistent with their original in-
tended purposes under their respective licenses; the
underlying corpora are drawn from Wikipedia and
public-domain literary works and contain no pri-
vate personal information, so no anonymization or
participant consent was required. Dataset statis-
tics, train/test splits, and graph statistics are re-
ported in Table 1; the model configurations, GNN
scorer (∼106 parameters), A800-based infrastruc-
ture, and full indexing-time compute budget (LLM
calls, prompt/completion tokens, and wall-clock
hours) are reported in Appendix C and Table 5,
with existing packages used at default settings. The
100 manually annotated triples in Section 4.4 were
labeled internally by the authors on two binary
criteria, so no external recruitment, payment, con-
sent procedure, or ethics-board review was applica-
ble. We release the source code under a permissive
open-source license, and AI assistants were used
only for editorial polishing and routine code sug-
gestions, with all scientific claims authored and
verified by the human authors.
References
Tommaso Bonomo, Luca Gioffré, and Roberto Navigli.
2025. Literaryqa: Towards effective evaluation of
long-document narrative qa. In Proceedings of the
2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing, pages 34074–34095.
Jianlv Chen, Shitao Xiao, Peitian Zhang, Kun Luo, Defu
Lian, and Zheng Liu. 2024. Bge m3-embedding:
Multi-lingual, multi-functionality, multi-granularity
text embeddings through self-knowledge distillation.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.03216, 4(5).
Darren Edge, Ha Trinh, Newman Cheng, Joshua
Bradley, Alex Chao, Apurva Mody, Steven Truitt,
Dasha Metropolitansky, Robert Osazuwa Ness, and
Jonathan Larson. 2024. From local to global: A
graph rag approach to query-focused summarization.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.16130.
Justin Gilmer, Samuel S Schoenholz, Patrick F Riley,
Oriol Vinyals, and George E Dahl. 2017. Neural mes-
sage passing for quantum chemistry. In International
conference on machine learning, pages 1263–1272.
Pmlr.
Zirui Guo, Lianghao Xia, Yanhua Yu, Tian Ao, and
Chao Huang. 2024.
Lightrag: Simple and fast
retrieval-augmented generation.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2410.05779, 2(3).
Bernal J Gutiérrez, Yiheng Shu, Yu Gu, Michihiro Ya-
sunaga, and Yu Su. 2024. Hipporag: Neurobiologi-
cally inspired long-term memory for large language
models. Advances in neural information processing
systems, 37:59532–59569.
Bernal Jiménez Gutiérrez, Yiheng Shu, Weijian Qi,
Sizhe Zhou, and Yu Su. 2025. From rag to memory:
Non-parametric continual learning for large language
models. In International Conference on Machine
Learning, pages 21497–21515. PMLR.
Haoyu Han, Li Ma, Yu Wang, Harry Shomer, Yongjia
Lei, Zhisheng Qi, Kai Guo, Zhigang Hua, Bo Long,
Hui Liu, and 1 others. 2025. Rag vs. graphrag: A sys-
tematic evaluation and key insights. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2502.11371.
Xanh Ho, Anh-Khoa Duong Nguyen, Saku Sugawara,
and Akiko Aizawa. 2020. Constructing a multi-hop
qa dataset for comprehensive evaluation of reasoning
steps. In Proceedings of the 28th International Con-
ference on Computational Linguistics, pages 6609–
6625.
Linhao Luo, Zicheng Zhao, Reza Haffari, Dinh Phung,
Chen Gong, and Shirui Pan. 2026. Gfm-rag: graph
foundation model for retrieval augmented generation.
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
38:36371–36405.


Michael Schlichtkrull, Thomas N Kipf, Peter Bloem,
Rianne Van Den Berg, Ivan Titov, and Max Welling.
2018. Modeling relational data with graph convolu-
tional networks. In European semantic web confer-
ence, pages 593–607. Springer.
Harsh Trivedi, Niranjan Balasubramanian, Tushar Khot,
and Ashish Sabharwal. 2022.
MuSiQue: Multi-
hop questions via single-hop question composition.
Transactions of the Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Yan Wang, Wenju Hou, Nan Sheng, Ziqi Zhao, Jialin
Liu, Lan Huang, and Juexin Wang. 2024. Graph
pooling in graph neural networks: methods and their
applications in omics studies. Artificial Intelligence
Review, 57(11):294.
An Yang, Anfeng Li, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang,
Binyuan Hui,
Bo Zheng,
Bowen Yu,
Chang
Gao, Chengen Huang, Chenxu Lv, and 1 others.
2025.
Qwen3 technical report.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2505.09388.
Chang Yang, Chuang Zhou, Yilin Xiao, Su Dong,
Luyao Zhuang, Yujing Zhang, Zhu Wang, Zijin Hong,
Zheng Yuan, Zhishang Xiang, and 1 others. 2026.
Graph-based agent memory: Taxonomy, techniques,
and applications. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.05665.
Zhilin Yang, Peng Qi, Saizheng Zhang, Yoshua Bengio,
William Cohen, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and Christo-
pher D Manning. 2018. Hotpotqa: A dataset for
diverse, explainable multi-hop question answering.
In Proceedings of the 2018 conference on empiri-
cal methods in natural language processing, pages
2369–2380.
Yibo Zhao, Jiapeng Zhu, Ye Guo, Kangkang He, and
Xiang Li. 2025. Eˆ 2graphrag: Streamlining graph-
based rag for high efficiency and effectiveness. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2505.24226.
Luyao Zhuang, Shengyuan Chen, Yilin Xiao, Huachi
Zhou, Yujing Zhang, Hao Chen, Qinggang Zhang,
and Xiao Huang. 2025. Linearrag: Linear graph re-
trieval augmented generation on large-scale corpora.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.10114.


A
Prompt
Subgraph incompleteness hint:
{
  "gnn_missing_score": <GNN_MISSING_SCORE>,
  "possible_missingness_types": [
    "missing_relations",
    "missing_entities",
    "missing_relations_and_entities"
  ],
  "instruction": "Treat this sampled subgraph as potentially incomplete. 
Look for important gaps in both relations and entities, not just shallow 
restatements of the known triples."
}
Subgraph root entity:
<ROOT_ENTITY>
Existing entities in the sampled subgraph:
<ENTITY_LIST>
Known triples in this sampled subgraph:
<KNOWN_TRIPLES>
Evidence passages:
<EVIDENCE_PASSAGES>
Silently follow this extraction strategy before producing the final JSON:
1. Summarize the current subgraph coverage.
2. Identify likely missing relations, likely missing entities, or both.
3. Prioritize deeper completions that connect multiple known triples, 
resolve references across multiple passages, or enrich the subgraph with 
important time, condition, prerequisite, ownership, role, sequence, or 
part-whole information.
4. When a new triple depends on multiple passages, attach all relevant 
chunk_ids instead of citing only one chunk.
5. Keep only facts that are directly stated or unambiguously supported by 
the evidence passages.
Required output schema:
{
  "new_triples": [
    {
      "triple": ["subject", "predicate", "object"],
      "chunk_ids": ["chunk-id"]
    }
  ]
}
Return JSON only.
Subgraph Completion Prompt
Figure 4: Prompt used by CROSSAUG for GNN-guided LLM completion. The selected subgraph, known triples,
candidate entities, and evidence chunks are provided to the LLM, which is instructed to return only evidence-
supported triples and entities.


B
Case Study
We provide additional representative examples
where CROSSAUG improves downstream QA per-
formance. Each case illustrates a distinct failure
mode of the base framework—misidentified enti-
ties, absent relational links, or insufficiently ranked
evidence—and shows how cross-chunk augmen-
tation addresses it by enriching the graph index
before retrieval.
Recovering the correct object in long-document
QA.
In Immensee, the question asks: “What did
Erich give Elisabeth?” The gold answer is a bird
or a new bird. The base framework answers “The
gilded birdcage”, while CROSSAUG answers “A
canary”. The base retrieval returns chunks 0025,
0026, 0013, 0021, and 0027, which contain related
narrative context but do not directly identify the gift.
CROSSAUG instead generates hidden relational
facts around the same narrative neighborhood, such
as (Eric, is, friend of Elisabeth) and (Elisabeth, ac-
cepted proposal from, Eric). These triples do not
directly state the answer, but they make the Eric–
Elisabeth relation more explicit in the graph and
change retrieval toward the passage where Eric’s
gift is described. As a result, CROSSAUG replaces
chunk 0027 with chunk 0014, which already con-
tains the base-extracted fact (Eric, sent canary to,
Elisabeth) and the decisive textual evidence:
“Elisabeth was standing by the window and stick-
ing some fresh chick-weed in a gilded birdcage
which he had not seen in the place before. In the
cage was a canary . . . ‘Your friend Eric sent it this
noon from his estate as a present for Elisabeth.”’
This example illustrates a common long-
document failure mode in which the retrieved con-
text contains a salient object near the answer but
not the answer-defining relation. The birdcage is
strongly associated with the scene and with Elis-
abeth, so it is a plausible distractor for the base
framework. However, knowing that Elisabeth is
near a birdcage, or that Erich is associated with
Elisabeth elsewhere in the story, is not sufficient
to infer what Erich gave her. The retrieval im-
provement therefore comes from a two-step effect:
CROSSAUG first strengthens the graph neighbor-
hood connecting the giver and recipient, and this
modified graph then surfaces chunk 0014, where
the canary is explicitly linked to Eric as the sender
and Elisabeth as the recipient of the present. By
shifting retrieval to this chunk, CROSSAUG pre-
vents the LLM from answering with a nearby con-
tainer and instead grounds the answer in the entity
that actually satisfies the gift relation.
Using hidden facts to bridge retrieval.
On
MuSiQue, the question asks: “What was the date
that Pam got married in The Office?” The gold
answer is October 8, 2009. The base framework
answers that the date is not mentioned in the pro-
vided information, whereas CROSSAUG answers
“October 8, 2009.” The base retrieval mainly re-
turns general Pam Beesly and The Office passages.
These passages state that Jim and Pam marry in the
episode Niagara, but they do not directly surface
the episode date:
“Jim and Pam marry early in the season, at Ni-
agara Falls, during the highly anticipated, hour
long episode, ‘Niagara’.”
CROSSAUG extracts hidden facts that connect
the marriage event to the episode, including (nia-
gara the office, features, pam beesly and jim halpert
s marriage) and (the episode, features, jim and pam
s marriage at niagara falls). These hidden facts
add a more direct graph link between the marriage
event and the episode. As a result, retrieval in-
cludes the Niagara episode page, which contains
the exact answer:
“Niagara” The Office episode . . . Original air date
October 8, 2009.
The base triples can connect Pam, Jim, and the
wedding event, but they do not reliably bridge that
event to the episode page that stores the air date.
This case shows that CROSSAUG does not merely
add more triples to the index. The completed graph
can change the starting points of graph retrieval,
allowing downstream QA to reach evidence that
the base graph fails to use.
Correcting an entity through better evidence
retrieval.
In Youth, the question asks: “What is
the name of the steamer that agrees to tow the
crew?” The gold answer is Sommerville. The
base framework answers “The Judea”, confusing
the damaged ship with the steamer that tows it.
CROSSAUG answers “The Sommerville.” The base
retrieval surfaces narrative passages from Youth,
including chunks 0001, 0006, 0016, 0012, and
0027. These passages mention the ship Judea and
earlier accidents but do not identify the towing
steamer. CROSSAUG instead retrieves chunks 0020
and 0021, where the towing event is explicitly de-
scribed:


“When our skipper came back we learned that the
steamer was the Sommerville, Captain Nash ...
and that the agreement was she should tow us
to Anjer or Batavia, if possible ... At noon the
steamer began to tow.”
The following chunk continues the same event:
“The speed of the towing had fanned the smol-
dering destruction ... ‘We had better stop this
towing’.”
The base answer is plausible precisely because
Judea is the central vessel throughout the narrative.
The question, however, asks for the steamer that
performs the towing, not the ship being towed. The
base evidence associates a prominent entity with
the question but does not resolve the specific rela-
tional role it asks about. CROSSAUG retrieves the
event-local passages that explicitly distinguish the
vessel doing the towing from the one being towed.
Improving evidence ranking with a hidden
date relation.
Another MuSiQue example asks:
“What date saw the writing of the song where the
devil went down to the state where WDXQ is
located?”
The gold answer is May 21, 1979.
The base framework answers “1978”, while
CROSSAUG answers “May 21, 1979.” Both frame-
works retrieve passages about The Devil Went
Down to Georgia and WDXQ, but CROSSAUG
moves the most useful evidence from rank 2 to
rank 1. The retrieved WDXQ passage establishes
the state:
“WDXQ (1440 AM) is a radio station licensed to
Cochran, Georgia, United States.”
The decisive song passage states:
“The Devil Went Down to Georgia” . . . Released
May 21, 1979 . . . Songwriter(s) Charlie Daniels,
Tom Crain, “Taz” DiGregorio, Fred Edwards,
Charles Hayward, James W. Marshall.
CROSSAUG introduces the hidden fact (the devil
went down to georgia, released in, may 21 1979),
which links the song directly to its release date in
the graph index. The base evidence can connect
WDXQ to Georgia and the song to adjacent release
context, but without the precise date relation it is
susceptible to anchoring on an approximate nearby
year such as 1978. This example highlights a bene-
fit distinct from the preceding cases: CROSSAUG
need not always introduce an entirely new docu-
ment into retrieval. By anchoring retrieval to this
hidden date triple, it promotes already-relevant evi-
dence to a higher rank, enabling the LLM to ground
its answer in the passage that contains the exact
date.
C
Cost and Performance Across
Parameter Settings
CROSSAUG exposes an LLM completion budget
parameter that controls how many candidate sub-
graphs receive LLM completion calls during in-
dexing. Adjusting this budget allows practition-
ers to navigate the trade-off between augmenta-
tion coverage and indexing overhead. Table 5 re-
ports the overhead introduced by CROSSAUG at
the default budget setting on LiteraryQA, where
CROSSAUG adds 1,483 LLM calls, 17.66M prompt
tokens, and 5.7 hours of indexing time on top of the
base pipeline—approximately 8.2% and 15.3% of
the base’s calls and wall-clock time. Each prompt
is substantially longer than in the base pipeline be-
cause it incorporates a local subgraph, multiple ev-
idence passages spanning different chunks, known
triples, and entity context; completion overhead
is comparatively small, as the model outputs only
evidence-supported triples.
Figure 5 shows how EM and F1 respond as the
budget is varied from 50 to 200 on LiteraryQA.
Both metrics improve as the budget increases while
completion-token cost scales proportionally. A bud-
get of 50 already yields measurable gains over the
base pipeline, showing that useful augmentation is
achievable at modest additional cost; increasing the
budget to 200 provides further, consistent improve-
ment. This controllable mechanism allows users to
select an operating point that matches their latency
and cost requirements.
Setting
Prompt Completion
LLM Time
(×106)
(×106)
Calls
(h)
Base
17.83
23.02 17,990
37.2
CROSSAUG
17.66
2.63
1,483
5.7
Table 5: Cost comparison between the HippoRAG2 base
pipeline and CROSSAUG. The CROSSAUG row reports
the additional overhead introduced by CROSSAUG on
top of the base pipeline. Prompt and completion token
counts are reported in millions of tokens (×106).


50
100
150
200
18.2
18.4
18.6
18.8
EM
(a) EM
50
100
150
200
33.6
33.8
34
F1
(b) F1
50
100
150
200
2
3
4
5
6
Budget
Tokens (×106)
(c) Completion Tokens
Figure 5: Budget sensitivity on LiteraryQA. Panels re-
port EM, F1, and completion-token overhead as the
LLM completion budget changes.
D
Hyperparameter Sensitivity Analysis
We further analyze the sensitivity of CROSSAUG’s
performance to key hyperparameters. Specifically,
we consider the LLM completion budget (B), the
fact-edge mask ratio (ρe), and the entity-node dele-
tion ratio (ρv), varying one hyperparameter at a
time while fixing the others. The results show that
CROSSAUG is robust against these hyperparame-
ters across a practical range of values.
Fact
Mask
EM
F1
Calls
Prompt
tokens
Completion
tokens
(×106)
0.10
17.60
32.96
2,313
27.79
4.02
0.15
17.60
32.99
1,577
18.70
2.84
0.20
18.40
33.81
1,483
17.66
2.63
0.25
17.45
33.41
1,031
11.97
1.83
Table 6: Hyperparameter sensitivity analysis for the fact-
mask ratio on (HippoRAG2+CROSSAUG, LiteraryQA).
Prompt and completion token counts are reported in
millions of tokens (×106).
The default ratio ρe=0.20 achieves the best per-
formance (EM 18.40, F1 33.81). Lower ratios
(0.10, 0.15) produce corruption signals that are
too subtle, yielding a less discriminative scorer that
passes more subgraphs to the LLM (up to 2,313
calls) without improving QA performance. A ra-
tio of 0.25 over-corrupts the training examples, re-
moving so many edges that the surviving subgraph
structure is too sparse to provide useful training
signal, reducing both LLM calls and performance.
Entity
Mask
EM
F1
Calls
Prompt
tokens
Completion
tokens
(×106)
0.06
17.53
33.02
1,309
12.91
1.83
0.08
18.40
33.81
1,483
17.66
2.63
0.10
17.89
33.44
1,433
16.83
2.57
0.12
17.67
32.93
1,400
16.12
2.53
Table 7: Hyperparameter sensitivity analysis for the
entity-mask ratio on (HippoRAG2+CROSSAUG, Liter-
aryQA). Prompt and completion token counts are re-
ported in millions of tokens (×106).
The default ratio ρv=0.08 yields the best per-
formance (EM 18.40, F1 33.81). A smaller ratio
(0.06) produces insufficiently corrupted views, lim-
iting the GNN’s ability to learn entity-level absence
patterns and resulting in fewer selected subgraphs
(1,309). Larger ratios (0.10, 0.12) remove too many
entities, stripping the training examples of the re-
lational structure needed for discriminative learn-
ing. The relatively narrow range of performance
differences across all four settings indicates that
CROSSAUG is moderately robust to the entity-mask
ratio.
Score
(θ)
EM
F1 LLM
Calls Prompt
tokens
Completion
tokens
(×106)
0.40
18.58 34.24
53.30 3,788
40.42
6.38
0.45
18.43 34.02
53.04 2,452
32.48
5.22
0.50
18.40 33.81
53.09 1,483
17.66
2.63
0.55
17.92 33.54
51.59
760
8.57
1.36
Table 8: Hyperparameter sensitivity analysis for GNN
score threshold θ on (HippoRAG2+CROSSAUG, Lit-
eraryQA). Prompt and completion token counts are in
millions (×106).
Lowering θ allows more subgraphs to pass the
GNN filter, increasing both coverage and LLM cost.
At θ=0.40, CROSSAUG selects 3,788 subgraphs
and achieves the best EM (18.58) and F1 (34.24),
but at more than 2.5× the token cost of the de-
fault (θ=0.50). At θ=0.55, the call count drops to
760 and prompt tokens fall to 8.57M, but both EM
and F1 also decline below the default. The default
θ=0.50 provides a balanced operating point; prac-
titioners can shift θ to trade performance for cost
as their indexing budget allows.
E
Human Preference Trial and
Evaluation Details
This appendix documents the protocol behind the
human evaluation summarized in Section 4.4 of the


main text, whose purpose is twofold: to estimate
the absolute quality of CROSSAUG-augmented
triples and to verify that the DeepSeek-V4-Pro
judge produces decisions consistent with informed
human raters.
Annotator profile.
Three of the paper authors
served as annotators. All three have prior research
experience with knowledge graphs and retrieval-
augmented generation, so they can interpret triple
syntax and reason about whether a cited chunk sup-
ports a triple. No external annotators or crowdwork-
ers were recruited, and no monetary compensation,
recruitment platform, or demographic balancing
was involved.
Sampling.
From
the
pool
of
CROSSAUG-
augmented
triples
produced
by
Hip-
poRAG2+CROSSAUG on the four benchmarks,
we drew a stratified random sample of 100 triples
(25 per benchmark). Stratification ensures that
domain-specific
failure
modes—encyclopedic
factoid linkage in HotpotQA/2Wiki, multi-hop
composition in MusiQue, and narrative coreference
in LiteraryQA—are equally represented in the
human-labeled set.
Rubric.
Each item presented to an annotator in-
cludes the triple in (subject, relation, object) form,
the cited chunk identifier(s), and the full chunk text.
Annotators returned a strict binary judgment on
two independent criteria:
• Factual correctness—the triple expresses a
relation that is true with respect to the cited
evidence and the document context.
• Chunk-citation accuracy—at least one cited
chunk contains direct textual evidence for the
triple.
The instructions explicitly state that the two criteria
are decided independently: a triple may be factually
correct overall while its citation fails to provide
direct support, and vice versa.
Procedure and quality control.
Each triple was
labeled independently by all three annotators with-
out communication during labeling. The final bi-
nary label per criterion is the majority vote across
the three annotators; disagreements were logged for
post-hoc inspection. Annotators were instructed
to rely only on the cited chunk text and to sup-
press external knowledge—a rule that is especially
important for LiteraryQA, where annotators may
recognize the source works.
Agreement with the automatic judge.
Inter-
rater agreement between the majority human la-
bel and the DeepSeek-V4-Pro decision is reported
as Human–LLM F1 and Cohen’s κ in Table 3.
The κ values of 0.765 (factual correctness) and
0.781 (chunk-citation accuracy) fall within the
substantial-agreement range under common inter-
pretation, justifying the use of the DeepSeek judge
as a scalable proxy for the larger per-dataset evalu-
ation of 1,000 triples.
Risks and consent.
The annotation task involved
only publicly available text (Wikipedia excerpts
and public-domain literary passages) and posed no
foreseeable risks to annotators. Because all anno-
tation was internal to the research team and used
only publicly released material, no external consent
procedure or ethics-board review was applicable.
